    Author: Raimo Niskanen <raimo(at)erlang(dot)org>
    Status: Accepted/27  To be implemented in OTP version 27.0
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 25-Sep-2023
    Erlang-Version: OTP-27
    Post-History:
****
EEP 66: Sigils for String Literals
----

Abstract
========

This EEP proposes Sigils for string literals very much like
[Elixir Sigils][1].  The chief reason is to facilitate other suggested
language features,  many of which exists in Elixir under the umbrella of
[Sigils][1], such as:

* Binary Strings: `unicode:unicode_binary()`
* Regular Expression Syntax
* Choice of string delimiters
* Verbatim Strings
* [String Interpolation Syntax][2], or Variable Interpolation

Rationale
=========

Many existing suggestions about features in the [Abstract][]
use a prefix before a normal erlang string such as:

    u"For UTF-8 encoded binary strings"

or

    bf"For UTF-8 encoded binary with interpolation formatting: ~foo()~"

This EEP suggests using the same or very similar syntax as in Elixir
for [Sigils][3] on literal strings to avoid syntactical problems with
simple prefixes, and to not make these sibling languages deviate
too much without good reason:

    ~"For UTF-8 encoded binary strings"

Design Decisions
----------------

In the following text double angle quotation marks are used to
mark source code characters to improve clarity.
For example: the dot character (full stop): «`.`».

### Erlang Language Structure (Tokenizer and Parser)

The Erlang programming language is built according to a traditional
tokenizer+parser+compiler model.

The tokenizer a.k.a. scanner a.k.a. lexer scans the source code
character sequence and converts it into a sequence of Tokens,
like atom, variable, string, integer, reserved word,
punctuation character or operator:
`atom`, `Variable`, `"string"`, `123`, *`case`*, `:` and `++`.

The parser takes a sequence of tokens and builds a parse tree,
AST (Abstract Syntax Tree), according to the Erlang grammar.
This AST is then what the compiler compiles into executable
(virtual machine) code.

#### The Tokenizer

The tokenizer is simple.  It stems from the tool *lex*
that try a set of regular expressions on the input and when one
matches it becomes a token and is removed from the input.
Rinse and repeat.

The tokenizer is no longer that simple, but it doesn't keep
much state and looks just a few fixed number of characters ahead
in the input.

For example; from the start state, if the tokenizer sees
a `'` character, it switches state to scanning a quoted atom.
While doing so it translates escape sequences such as `\n`
(into ASCII 10) and when it sees a `'` character it produces
an atom token and goes back to the start state.

### Problems with simple prefixes

All of these simple prefixes have to become separate tokens in the tokenizer:
«`bf"`» would constitute the start token for a binary string
with interpolation syntax.  So would «`bf"""`», «`b"`», «`b"""`»,
and so on.

The tokenizer would have to know of all combinations of prefix characters
and emit distinct tokens for every combination.

Today, the character sequence «`b`», «`f`», «`"`» is scanned as a token
for the atom `bf` followed by the string start token `"`.
That combination fails in the parser so it is syntactically invalid today,
which is what makes simple prefixes a possible language extension.

A simple prefix approach would have to scan a number of characters
ahead to distinguish between an atom followed by string start
vs. prefixed string start, and it would be a different number
of characters depending on which atom characters that have
been found so far.  This is rather messy.

Furthermore, it is likely that we want the feature of choosing
[String Delimiters][], especially for regular expressions such as:

    re(^"+.*/.*$)

Among the desired delimiters are `/` and `< >`.  The currently
valid code «`b<X`» meaning atom `b` less than `X`, would instead
have to be interpreted as prefixed string start `b<` with `X`
being the first string content character.

For the `/` character we run into similar problems with for example
«`b/X`», which would be a run-time error today, but if we also would
want capital letter prefixes, then «`B/X`» is perfectly valid today
but would become a string start.

There are more likely problems with simple string prefixes:
«`#bf{`» is today the start of a record named `bf`, and is
scanned as punctuation character `#`, atom `bf` and separator `{`,
which the parser figures out to be a record start.

With simple prefix characters the tokenizer would have to be rewritten
to recognize «`#bf`» as a new record token, a rewrite that might cause
unexpected changes in record handling.  For example, today, «`# bf {`»
is also a valid record start, so to be compatible the tokenizer
would have to allow white-space or even newlines within the new record
token, between `#` and the atom characters, which would be really ugly...

For other reasons, namely that function call parenthesis are optional,
Elixir has chosen to use the `~` character as the start of
a string prefix which they call a "[Sigil][1]".

Having a distinct start character for this feature simplifies
tokenizing and parsing.

### Sigil

In a general sense, a [Sigil][3], is a prefix to a variable
that indicates its *type*, such as `$I` in Basic or Perl,
where `$` is the sigil and `I` is the variable.

Here we define a Sigil as a prefix (and a suffix) to a string literal
that indicates how it should be *interpreted*.  The Sigil is
a *syntactic sugar* that creates some Erlang term.

A Sigil string literal consists of:

1. The [Sigil Prefix][], `~` followed by a name that may be empty.
2. The [String Content][] within [String Delimiters][].
3. The [Sigil Suffix][], a name character sequence that may be empty.

A Sigil looks like a string with a prefix (and maybe a suffix),
but expands to some term (or expression), so it cannot be subject
to the string concatenation the parser does.

Therefore «`"abc" "def"`» is `"abcdef"` but «`~s"abc" "def"`»
should be illegal, and also all other sequences consisting
of a Sigil of any type, and any other term, in any order.

### Sigil Prefix

The Sigil Prefix starts whith the Tilde character `~`, followed
by the Sigil Type which is a name composed of a sequence of characters
that are allowed as the second or later characters in a variable or an atom.
In short ISO [Latin-1][] letters, digits, `_` and `@`.
The Sigil Type may be empty.

The Sigil Type defines how the [Sigil][] syntactic sugar
shall be interpreted.  The suggested Sigil Types are:

* «»: the vanilla (default (empty name)) [Sigil][].

  Creates an Erlang `unicode:unicode_binary()`.
  It is a string represented as a UTF-8 encoded binary,
  equivalent to applying `unicode:characters_to_binary/1`
  on the [String Content][].  The [String Delimiters][]
  and escape characters work as they already do for regular strings
  or triple-quoted strings.

  So «`~"abc\d"`» is equivalent to «`<<"abc\d"/utf8>>`», and
  «`~'abc"d'`» is equivalent to «`<<"abc\"d"/utf8>>`».

  Regular strings honour escape sequences but triple-quoted strings
  are verbatim, so «`~"`» is equivalent to «`~b"`» but
  «`~"""`» is equivalent to «`~B"""`», as described below.

  A simple way to create strings as UTF-8 binaries is supposedly
  the first and most desired missing string feature in Erlang.
  This sigil does just that.

* `b`: `unicode:unicode_binary()`

  Creates a UTF-8 encoded binary, handling escape characters
  in the string content.  Other features such as string interpolation
  will require another Sigil Type or using the [Sigil Suffix][].

  In Elixir this corresponds to the `~s` sigil, a [string][4].

* `B`: `unicode:unicode_binary()`, verbatim.

  Creates a UTF-8 encoded binary, with verbatim string content.
  The content ends when the end delimiter is found.
  There is no way to escape the end delimiter.

  In Elixir this corresponds to the `~S` sigil, a [string][4].

* `s`: `string()`.

  Creates a Unicode codepoint list, handling escape characters
  in the string content.  Other features such as string interpolation
  will require another Sigil Type or using the [Sigil Suffix][].

  In Elixir this corresponds to the `~c` sigil, a [charlist][5].

* `S`: `string()`, verbatim.

  Creates a Unicode codepoint list, with verbatim string content.
  The content ends when the end delimiter is found.
  There is no way to escape the end delimiter.

  In Elixir this corresponds to the `~C` sigil, a [charlist][5].

* `R`: regular expression.

  This EEP proposes to not implement regular expressions yet.
  It is still unclear how integration with the `re` module
  should be done, and if it is worth the effort compared
  to just using the `S` or the `B` Sigil Type.

  The best idea so far was that this sigil creates a term
  `{re,RE::unicode:charlist(),Flags::[unicode:latin1_char()]}`
  that is an uncompiled regular expression with compile flags,
  suitable for (yet to be implemented) functions in the `re` module.
  The `RE` element is the [String Content][], and the `Flags` element
  is the [Sigil Suffix][].

  See the [Regular Expressions][] section about the reasoning
  behind this proposed term type.

  First the [end delimiter][] is found and within the [String Content][],
  character escape sequences are handled according to
  the regular expression rules.

  The main advantage of a regular expression [Sigil][] is to avoid
  the additional escaping of `\` that regular erlang strings require.

  Today: `re:run(Subject, "^\\s*\"[a-z]+\\\\\\d+\"", [caseless,unicode])`

  Sigil: `re:run(Subject, ~r'^\s*"[a-z]+\\\d+"'iu)`

  Other advantages are possible tools and library integration features
  such as making the `re` module recognize this tuple format,
  and having the code loader pre-compile them.

[Sigil Prefix][]es with other, unknown, Sigil Types should cause an error
"illegal sigil prefix" in the tokenizer or the parser.  Another possibility
would be to pass them further in the compilation chain enabling
parse transforms to act on them, but that feature can be added later,
and in general one should avoid using parse transforms
since they are often a source for hard to find problems.

These proposed Sigil Types are named according to the corresponding
Erlang types.  The Sigil Types in [Elixir][1] are named according to
Elixir types.  So, for example, a `~s` Sigil Prefix in Erlang
creates an Erlang `string()`, which is a list of Unicode codepoints,
but in Elixir the `~s` Sigil Prefix creates an Elixir [String][4]
which is a UTF-8 encoded binary.

Consistency within the language is supposedly more important
that between the languages, and that the string types are
different between the languages is already a known quirk.

### String Delimiters

Immediately following the [Sigil Prefix][] is the string start delimiter.
A specific start delimiter character has a corresponding
end delimiter character.

The allowed start-end delimiter character pairs are:
`( ) [ ] { } < > « »`.

The following characters are start delimiters that have themselves
as end delimiters: `/ | ' " #`.

Triple-quote delimiters are also allowed, that is; a sequence of
3 or more double quote `"` characters as described in [EEP 64][].

For a given [Sigil Type][] except the [Vanilla Sigil][],
which String Delimiters that are used does not affect how
the string content is interpreted, besides finding the end delimiter.

For a triple-quoted string, though, conceptually the end delimiter
doesn't occur in the string's content, so interpreting the string content
does not interfere with finding the end delimiter.

The proposed set of delimiters is the same as in [Elixir][1],
plus `« »` and `#`.  They are the characters in [Latin-1][]
that are normally used for bracketing or text quoting,
and those that feel like full height vertikal lines,
except: `\` is too often used for character escaping,
`` ` `` and `´` look too much like `'`, `¦` looks too much like `|`,
and `#` is too useful to *not* include since it in many contexts
(shell scripts, Perl regular expressions) it is a comment character
that is easy to avoid in the [String Content][].

It may not be obvious how to type the `«` and `»` characters
on some keyboards (US), but there *are* ways that should not
discourage a determined programmer.  When using X Compose sequences
it is simply [Compose] [<] [<] and [Compose] [>] [>].

### String Content

Between the start and end [String Delimiters][], all characters
are string content.

In a triple-quoted string all characters are verbatim, but stripping
of indentation and leading and trailing newline is done as usual
as described in [EEP 64][].

In a string with single character [String Delimiters][],
normal Erlang escape sequences prefixed with `\` are honoured,
as usual for regular Erlang strings and quoted atoms

A specific [Sigil Type][] can have it's own character escaping rules,
which may affect finding the [end delimiter][].

### Sigil Suffix

Immediately following the String Content comes the Sigil Suffix,
which may be empty.

The Sigil Suffix consists, as the Sigil Type in the [Sigil Prefix][],
of name characters.

The Sigil Suffix may indicate how to interpret the String Content,
for a specific [Sigil Type][].
For example; for the `~R` [Sigil Prefix][] (regular expression),
the Sigil Suffix is interpreted as short form compile options
such as «`i`» that makes the regular expression character
case insensitive.  For example «`~R/^from: /i`».

Things that may have to be performed by the tokenizer, such as
how to handle escape character rules, should not be affected
by the Sigil Suffix, since the tokenizer has already scanned
the [String Content][] when it sees the Sigil Suffix.

If a [Sigil Type][] doesn't allow a Sigil Suffix, an error
"illegal sigil suffix" should be generated in the tokenizer
or the parser.

### Regular Expressions

A regular expression sigil «`~R"expression"flags`» should
be translated to something useful for tools/libraries.
There are at least two ways; [uncompiled regular expressions][],
or [compiled regular expressions][].

#### Uncompiled Regular Expression

The value of a regular expression [Sigil][] is chosen
to be a tuple `{re,RE,Flags}`.

With this representation, the `re` module can be augmented
with functions that accept this tuple format that bundles
a regular expression with compile flags.  These functions
are `re:compile/1,2`, `re:replace/3,4` `re:run/2,3`,
and `re:split/2,3`.  Translation of the `Flags`' characters
into `re:compile_option()`s should be done by these functions.

Example of calling a yet to be implemented `re:run/3`:

    1> re:run("ABC123", ~r"abc\d+"i, [{capture,first,list}]).
    {match,["ABC123"]}

Since the [Sigil][] value represents an uncompiled regular expression,
the user can choose when to compile it with `re:compile/1,2`,
or use it directly in for example `re:run/2,3`.

It is possible to implement an optimization to make the compiler
aware that when passing a regular expression [Sigil][],
which is a literal, to functions like `re:run/2,3`, code can be emitted
for the code loader (a now missing feature) to compile
the regular expression at load time and instead pass
the pre-compiled regular expression to `re:run/2,3`.

For this optimization to be safe, other compile options than the ones
in the [Sigil][] value cannot be allowed to affect for example `re:run/3`
that has options as the third argument.  If `re:run/3` would fail
for any compile options (only allow run-time options), or if
the options argument is a literal to be included in
pre-compilation, then such an optimization is safe.

#### Compiled Regular Expression

Another possibility would be that the value of a regular expression
[Sigil][] is a compiled regular expression; the `re:mp()` type.

Then it can be used as above, *except* as an argument to
`re:compile/1,2`.  Pre-compilation would be a hard requirement
since the running Erlang code *must* see a compiled regular expression.

And we would still have to decide on another sigil type to be used
in `re:compile/1,2` that is syntactic sugar for an *uncompiled*
regular expression.  Without that a `~S` sigil could be used
but that won't have the compile flags as suffix so those flags
cannot be given in the same way for compiled vs. uncompiled
regular expressions.

#### Therefore Uncompiled

Since we in any case need a [Sigil][] that is syntactic sugar for
an uncompiled regular expression, and pre-compilation optimization
is possible with that, this EEP suggests that a regular expression Sigil
should represent an *uncompiled* regular expression with compile flags.

### Comparison with Elixir

There is no [Vanilla Sigil][] (empty [Sigil Type][]) in Elixir.

This EEP proposes to add the following [String Delimiters][]
to the set that Elixir has: `« » #`.

The string and binary [Sigil Type][]s are named differently
between the languages, to keep the names consistent within
the language (Erlang): `~s` in Elixir is `~b` in Erlang,
and `~c` in Elixir is `~s` in Erlang, so `~s` means
different things, because strings are different things.

When Elixir allows escape sequences in the [String Content][]
it also allows string interpolation.  This EEP proposes to *not*
implement string interpolation in the suggested [Sigil Type][]s.

When Elixir doesn't allow escape sequences in the [String Content][],
it still allows escaping the end delimiter.  This EEP proposes
that such strings should be truly verbatim whith no possibility
to escape the end delimiter.

There are small differences in which escape sequences that are implemented
in the languages; Elixir allows escaping of newlines, and has
an escape sequence `\a`, that Erlang does not have.

There are also small differences in how newlines are handled
between `~S` heredocs in Elixir and triple-quoted strings in Erlang.
See [EEP 64][].

Details about regular expression sigils, `~R`, in particular
their [Sigil Suffix][]es remains to be decided in Erlang.
Also, there still is a question about escaping the end delimiter or not.

It has not been decided how or even *if* string interpolation
will be implemented in Erlang, but a [Sigil Suffix][] or
new [Sigil Type][]s would most probably be used.

Reference Implementation
------------------------

[PR-7684][] Implements the `~s`, `~S`, `~b`, `~B`
and the `~` (vanilla) Sigil, according to this EEP.

The tokenizer produces a `sigil_prefix` token before the string literal,
and a `sigil_suffix` token after.  The parser merges and transforms them
into the correct output term.

Another approach would be to produce (for example) a `sigil_string` token
for the whole string and then handle that in the parser.
It would require more state to be kept in the tokenizer between
the parts of the sigil prefixed string, and therefore need
more tokenizer rewriting.

[1]:     https://elixir-lang.org/getting-started/sigils.html
         "The Elixir Programming Language: Getting Started - Sigils"

[2]:     https://github.com/erlang/eep/pull/45
         "String Interpolation Syntax"

[3]:     https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sigil_(computer_programming)
         "Wikipedia: Sigils"

[4]:     https://elixir-lang.org/getting-started/basic-types.html#strings
         "The Elixir Programming Language: Getting Started - Basic Types - Strings"

[5]:     https://elixir-lang.org/getting-started/binaries-strings-and-char-lists.html#charlists
         "The Elixir Programming Language: Getting Started - Binaries, strings, and charlists - Charlists"

[EEP 64]:     https://www.erlang.org/eeps/eep-0064.md
              "EEP 64: Triple-Quoted Strings"

[Latin-1]:    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO/IEC_8859-1
              "Wikipedia: ISO-IEC 8859-1"

[PR-7684]:    https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/7684
              "Sigils on String Literals"

[Abstract]:             #abstract
                        "Abstract"

[Sigil]:                #sigil
                        "Sigil"

[Sigil Prefix]:         #sigil-prefix
                        "Sigil Prefix"

[Sigil Type]:           #sigil-prefix
                        "Sigil Type"

[Vanilla Sigil]:        #sigil-prefix
                        "Vanilla Sigil"

[String Delimiters]:    #string-delimiters
                        "String Delimiters"

[end delimiter]:        #string-delimiters
                        "String Delimiters"

[String Content]:       #string-content
                        "String Content"

[Sigil Suffix]:         #sigil-suffix
                        "Sigil Suffix"

[Regular Expressions]:  #regular-expressions
                        "Regular Expressions"

[uncompiled regular expressions]:       #uncompiled-regular-expressions
                                        "Uncompiled Regular Expressions"

[compiled regular expressions]:         #compiled-regular-expressions
                                        "Compiled Regular Expressions"

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal
license, whichever is more permissive.

[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
[VimVar]: <> " vim: set fileencoding=utf-8 expandtab shiftwidth=4 softtabstop=4: "
