    Author: Richard A. O'Keefe <ok(at)cs(dot)otago(dot)ac(dot)nz>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Erlang-Version: R16A
    Created: 07-Feb-2013
    Post-History:
****
EEP 42: setrlimit(2) analogue for Erlang
----

Abstract
========

A new function `erlang:set_process_info_limit/2` is added,
allowing a process to set limits on its own memory use.

Specification
=============

    erlang:set_process_info_limit(Item, Limit :: integer()) ->
        Old_Limit :: integer()

An `Old_Limit` of 0 means that no limit has been set.
A Limit of 0 means that no limit is to be set.

The Items that can be set are

- `memory`, the number of bytes that may be used for stack, heap, and
internal structures.

- `memory_words`, the same value as `memory`, but expressed in
words to be consistent with `heap_size`, `total_heap_size`, and
`stack_size` in `erlang:process_info/[1,2]`.  Those functions should
also be revised to accept this Item.

- `message_queue_len`, the number of unprocessed messages.
(Aside.) The documentation refers to `message_queue_len`
but the system generates and recognises `message_queue_len`.
(End aside.)

The values that are actually set may be less than Limit as
long as any physically realisable system in the node as
configured cannot exceed the value used.

A non-zero memory limit is checked after each garbage
collection or other memory restructuring; setting the memory
limit to a non-zero value less than the current
`process_info(self(), 'memory')` forces an immediate garbage
collection.

If the memory required by a process exceeds its limit, the
process is exited with reason `memory`.

A non-zero message queue length limit is checked whenever
the message queue length is about to be incremented, or
when such a limit is set.

If the message queue length limit is exceeded, the process
is exited with reason `message_queue_len`.


Motivation
==========

It is currently possible for an Erlang process to grab
memory without limit and eventually take down the whole
node.  This problem is frequently reported in the Erlang
mailing list.

It is also possible for the message queue of an Erlang
process to grow without limit.  This problem too is
reported often enough to be recognised.

This is an EEP rather than a library change request because
it requires low level runtime system changes to support it.
For example, the limits have to be _stored_ somewhere,
suggesting a change in the data structure holding information
about a process.  The limits have to be _checked_, meaning
that changes to the garbage collector and the message sending
core are required.  The limits have to be _enforced_,
meaning that two new exit reasons have to be supported.  And
the new exit reasons and the new function have to be
_documented_, requiring changes to more than one document.

The need is long-standing, and at least the presence of this
EEP may provoke discussion leading to _some_ resolution.

Rationale
=========

The function that sets a limit should have a name based
in the name of the function that reports current use.
That function is `process_info`, hence the name I've
chosen here is `set_process_info_limit`.

The `erlang:process_info/[1,2]` functions can report on
any Erlang process.  But it is clearly dangerous to let
a process set another process's limits.  All we actually
_need_ is for a process to be able to set its own limits
in a startup phase.  That could be done by adding
`{'memory',Size}` and `{'message_queue_len',Count}` options
to `spawn_opt/[2,3]`.  However,

    spawn_opt(Fun, [{memory,128*1024}])

can be mimicked by

    spawn(fun () ->
        erlang:set_process_info_limit(memory, 128*1024),
        Fun()
    end)

and `set_process_info_limit/2` allows a process to set
different limits at different times.  If you are trying
to protect the system from _malice_, setting limits in
`spawn_opt/[2,3]` is the way to go.  If you are trying to
protect the system from _accident_, letting a process
set its own limits is the way to go.

The names for the Items to be set clearly must be identical
to the names used for the same thing elsewhere.

The `memory_words` item is introduced because in a world where
some of my programs run 32-bit and some run 64-bit it is just
too confusing to count bytes, especially as stack size and so
on are measured in words, not bytes.

I considered allowing `total_heap_size` and `stack_size` and so on
to be given their own limits, but on finding that `total_heap_size`
"currently includes the stack of the process", decided that it
was "currently" a bad idea.

I would have liked to allow setting a limit on the number
of reductions, so that a process that doesn't intend to
live forever can ensure its own eventual death.  However,
the documentation warns that `erlang:bump_reductions/1`
"might be removed", so presumably reduction counting
_per se_ might well disappear.

The point of letting the value actually set for a limit
to be smaller is to allow an implementation to use only
values that will fit in a `size_t`, so that low level
code does not need to deal with bignums.  On a
POSIX-compliant operating system, an Erlang implementation
may use the `RLIMIT_DATA` value for the UNIX process
if the memory limit is bigger, and may use `RLIMIT_DATA`
divided by the minimum size of a message for the message
queue length.  Or it might use other appropriate system
limits.

The biggest question is "what happens if a limit is exceeded?"

For memory, we could exit with `system_limit` as reason, but
that wouldn't make clear _what_ limit had been exceeded.  It
seems advisable to introduce a new reason, and making the
reason the same as the name of the limit seems the least
confusing approach.

For message queue length, I would prefer it if the process
that _sends_ the message were the one to get a run time error.
However, the Erlang documentation guarantees that sending a
message to a pid always succeeds, whether the process is live
or dead, and I don't want to change too much.  A message queue
might build up because some process(es) is(are) sending junk;
we would prefer exiting junk senders to exiting junk receivers.
However, if the junk receiver isn't cleaning out the junk, that
junk is _never_ going away, so it's _always_ going to be costing
time to skip over as well as memory to store.  That argument
applies to another option that I considered: just discarding
messages that would make the queue too long.  The Erlang Way is
to let subsystems that get into trouble crash.  So let it be.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

The new function is not exported by default
so it cannot be called accidentally.


Reference Implementation
========================

None in this draft.


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.


[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
[VimVar]: <> " vim: set fileencoding=utf-8 expandtab shiftwidth=4 softtabstop=4: "
