    Author: Marko Minđek <marko.mindek(at)invariant(dot)hr>,
            Karlo Nikšić <kuna.prime(at)invariant(dot)hr>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 02-Jan-2024
    Erlang-Version: OTP-27
    Post-History:
****
EEP XXX: Internal export
----

Abstract
========

This EEP introduces a new directive called `internal_export` which
enables semantic separation of function exports.  This EEP is mostly
inspired by [EEP 5][].

Rationale
=========

Erlang application API is an ambigous term.  In theory, it is a set
of module APIs (exported functions).  In practice, it is a set of
modules' APIs but without modules considered internal, undocumented
exports, callback implementation, etc.  While reading the docs,
you can conclude what is application API, but while reading the
source, it's not so straightforward.

Not all exports are semantically the same.  A function can be exported
to be part of the application API, to implement a callback, to test
some code, or to allow modules within the application to use it.
Currently, from the user perspective, they are all the same.  There
is a convention not to use undocumented exports, but there is no way
to enforce that convention in a codebase.

The goal of this EEP is to give a mechanism to separate application API
exports from other exports.

A few terms are introduced for convenience:

- internally exported function - a function marked with
`internal_export` attribute
- internal module - module containing only internally exported functions
- application dependencies - a set of applications found in `applications`,
`include_applications` and `optional_applications` properties in
`.app` file (and their dependencies, recursively)
- export scope - a set of modules that can *legally* access the
exported function

Internally exported functions are still globally exported, but
application users are discouraged from using them.  The mechanism is similar
to the deprecation mechanism, where you *can* call deprecated functions,
although it's not recommended.  You also have a mechanism to check if
there are static calls to that function so you don't need to manually
check if each function is deprecated.

Specification
=============

Syntax for internally exporting a function would be the following:

    -internal_export([f/a, ...]).

where `f` is `atom()` and `a` is `arity()`.

Internally exported functions can *legally* be called from within
their applications and from their dependencies.  The reason why
the application's dependencies can *legally* call internally exported
functions are callbacks to other applications<sup>1</sup>.

Example
-------

Application `A` contains module `mod_A` which exports `public/1`
and internally exports `internal/1`.

Application `B` contains module `mod_B` which exports `x/1` and
internally exports `y/1`.

Application `B` depends on application `A`.

`mod_A:internal/1` can *legally* be called only from within `A`,
while `mod_B:y/1` can be *legally* called from both `A` and `B`.
Static call from `A` to `mod_B:y/1` will probably never occur,
because `A` is not aware of `B`, but it could be that `mod_B:y/1`
is a callback implementation for `mod_A`.  All the other applications
can't *legally* call `mod_A:internal/1` and `mod_B:y/1`.

[EEP 5][] Modifications
=======================

Although the idea is similar, there are a few key differences in design and
implementation between this EEP and [EEP 5][]:

Application-based approach
--------------------------

There is an open question of whether to export functions to modules or
applications.  Exporting to modules is currently proposed in [EEP 5][].

Although the module-based approach is straightforward, it has 2 drawbacks:

1. Maintainance - you have to manually intervene after a module is
added or renamed.
2. Exporting to behaviors - you would expect that

        -export_to(gen_server, [init/1, handle_cast/2, handle_call/3]).

would work.

It would be very convenient to export callbacks this way instead of

        %% gen_server API
        -export([init/1, handle_cast/2, handle_call/3]).

, but that notation would actually be wrong because calls to `gen_server`
callbacks are done in `gen` module, not `gen_server`.
Users shouldn't even think about that implementation detail, let alone
writing code dependent on it.

Implicit scope
--------------

Currently, comment-based is a widespread approach to clarify
module/application API, e.g.:

    %% gen_server
    -export([init/1, handle_cast/2, handle_call/3, code_change/3]).
    %% system calls
    -export(...).
    %% test-only
    -export(...).
    %% API
    -export(...).
    %% internal exports
    -export(...).

This of course works, but a comment-based semantical separation of
exports limits any usage of code analysis tools.  Can we do better?

In [EEP 5][], the responsibility of declaring export scope is on
the programmer.  This may result in convenient, more semantically
valuable code, like:

    -export_to([mod_x, mod_y], [f_1/1, f_2/0]).

It denotes what is the purpose of some particular export, i.e.
which modules can call them.  Notice that this is only convenient when
limiting function usage to the application itself (conventionally
called *internal exports*) - it was mentioned before that this approach
is not appropriate when exporting functions to behavior modules.

This brings up a question: how much control do we really need/want?
This EEP aims to limit ways users can misuse applications/modules.
**Missuage doesn't come from within the application itself, or from
its dependency applications, but from its users!** I.e. besides private
and global, there is a need for *internal* export scope.

There is no need for the user to specify the scope manually as it can be
determined at compile-time: internally exported function can be called
from the application where it is declared or from any of its
dependency applications.

Implicit scoping is not as semantically valuable as explicit one,
but it does the main task; **it separates application/module public
API from internal stuff**.

Syntax
------

The `export_to` attribute seems completely logical when used with explicit
scoping, but with implicit scoping, it is unclear to what *_to* refer.
Name `internal_export` is proposed instead of `export_to`.
Notice that it only has one argument with the same syntax rules
as for `export`.

Implementation strategy
-----------------------

In [EEP 5][], calls would checked in the loader (for static calls) and at
runtime (for dynamic calls), causing them to fail if an invalid call occurs.
In contrast, this EEP suggests a code-analysis-based approach, with
`xref` checking all static calls and disregarding all dynamic calls.
Calls to all functions remain valid at runtime.  This approach,
of course, provides no runtime guarantees, but imposes no performance
hit and requires significantly less work and maintenance.

Reference Implementation
========================

The current implementation is in [PR 7407][2] in the OTP repository.

Besides this PR, there are forum threads about
[the need for internal exports][3] and [the implementation][4].

Backward compatibility
======================

Code that is already using `-internal_export(FAs).` attribute
would be affected.

References
==========

[EEP 5]: eep-0005.md
         "EEP 5: More Versatile Encapsulation with `export_to`"

[1]: Even though they never get called statically, it is semantically
important to denote those callbacks can *legally* be used from dependency
applications.  If someday dynamic checks become a thing mechanism
could stay the same.  That said, the current mechanism can be simplified
and only check if internally exported is used only from within the
same application.

[2]: https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/7407
     "PR 7407: Feature: internal_export"

[3]: https://erlangforums.com/t/some-thoughts-on-callbacks/1851
    "Forum thread: Some thoughts on callbacks"

[4]: https://erlangforums.com/t/feature-internal-export/2697/18
    "Forum thread: Feature: internal_export"

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal
license, whichever is more permissive.

[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
[VimVar]: <> " vim: set fileencoding=utf-8 expandtab shiftwidth=4 softtabstop=4: "
