    Author: Richard A. O'Keefe <ok(at)cs(dot)otago(dot)ac(dot)nz>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Erlang-Version: R12B-4
    Created: 23-Jul-2008
    Post-History:
****
EEP 16: is_between/3
----



Abstract
========

There should be a new built in function for guards,

    is_between(Term, Lower_Bound, Upper_Bound)

which succeeds when `Term`, `Lower_Bound`, and `Upper_Bound`
are all integers, and `Lower_Bound =< Term =< Upper_Bound`.



Specification
=============

A new guard BIF is added.

    is_between(Term, LB, UB)

In expression use, if LB or UB is not an integer,
a badarith exception is thrown, just like an attempt to
do remainder or bitwise operations on non-integer arguments.
In guard use, that exception becomes failure.

This is a type test which succeeds (or returns true) if
Term is an integer and lies between LB and UB inclusive,
and fails (or returns false) for other values of Term.

As an expression, it has the same effect as

    ( X = Term, Y = LB, Z = UB,
      Y bor Z,
      ( is_integer(X), X >= Y, X =< Z )
    )

where X, Y, and Z are new variables that are not exported.

In particular,

    is_integer(tom, dick, harry)

should raise an exception, not return false, as `is_integer(Term)`
is only tested after LB and UB have been found to be integers.

As a guard test, it has the same effect as

    ( X = Term, Y = LB, Z = UB,
      is_integer(Y), is_integer(Z), is_integer(X),
      X >= Y, X =< Z
    )

would have, were that allowed.  However, it admits a much
more efficient implementation.



Motivation
==========

Currently some people test whether a variable is a byte thus:

    -define(is_byte(X), (X >= 0 andalso X =< 255)).

This is actual current practice.  However, it fails to check
that `X` is an integer, so `?is_byte(1.5)` succeeds, it may
evaluate `X` twice, so `?is_byte((Pid ! 0))` will send two messages,
not the expected one, and the current Erlang compiler generates
noticeably worse code in guards for 'andalso' and 'orelse' than
it does for ',' and ';'.

It is also useful to test whether a subscript is in range,

    -define(in_range(X, T), (X >= 1 andalso X =< size(T))).

which has similar problems.

Using `is_between`, we can replace these definitions with

    -define(is_byte(X),     is_between(X, 0, 255)).
    -define(in_range(X, T), is_between(X, 1, size(T))).

which are free of those problems



Rationale
=========

One alternative to this design would be to follow the example
of Common Lisp (and the even earlier example of the systems
programming language on HP 3000s) and allow

    E1 =< E2 =< E3      % (<= E1 E2 E3) in Lisp

(and possibly also

    E1 =< E2 <  E3
    E1 <  E2 =< E3
    E1 <  E2 <  E3)     % (<  E1 E2 E3) in Lisp

as guards and expressions, evaluating each expression exactl
once.  I am very fond of this syntax and would be pleased to
see it.  This would resolve the double evaluation of `E2`, the
possible non-evaluation of `E3`, and the inefficiency of 'andalso'.
However, it would not address the problem that a byte or an
index is not just a NUMBER in a certain range, but an INTEGER.
If Erlang had multiple comparison syntax, there would still be
a use for `is_between/3`.



Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Code that defines a function named `is_between/3` will be
affected.  Since the Erlang compiler parses an entire
module before semantic analysis, it's easy to
-   check for a definition of `is_between/3`
-   warn if one is present
-   disable the new built-in in such a case.



Reference Implementation
========================

There is none.  However, we can sketch one.
Two new BEAM instructions are required:

    {test,is_between,Lbl,[Src1,Src2,Src3]}
    {bif,is_between,?,[Src1,Src2,Src3],Dst}

The test does

    if Src2 is not an integer, goto Lbl.
    if Src3 is not an integer, goto Lbl.
    if Src1 is not an integer, goto Lbl.
    if Src1 < Src2, goto Lbl.
    if Src3 < Src1, goto Lbl.

The bif does

    if Src2 is not an integer, except!
    if Src3 is not an integer, except!
    if Src1 is not an integer
    or Src1 < Src2
    or Src3 < Src1
    then move 'false' to Dst
    else move 'true'  to Dst.

Nothing here is fundamentally new, and only my unfamiliarity with
how to add instructions to the emulator prevents me doing it.  And
my total ignorance of how to tell HiPE about them!

There might be some point in having variants of these instructions
for use when Src2 and Src3 are integer literals; I would certainly
expect HiPE to elide redundant tests here.

The compiler would simply recognise `is_between/3` and emit the
appropriate BEAM rather like it recognises `is_atom/1`.
My ignorance of how to extend the emulator is exceeded by my
ignorance of how to extend the compiler.  Certainly we'd need

    ...
    is_bif(erlang, is_between, 3) -> true;
    ...
    is_guard_bif(erlang, is_between, 3) -> true;
    ...
    is_pure(erlang, is_between, 3) -> true;
    ...

(but NOT an `is_safe` rule) in `erl_bifs.erl`.  Or would we?  I've
not been able to figure out where `is_guard_bif/3` is called.
There will need to be a new entry in genop.tab as well.
Ohhh, `erl_internal.erl` is in `.../stdlib`, not `.../compiler`.
OK, so a couple of functions in `erl_internal.erl` need to be patched
to recognise `is_between/3`; what needs changing to generate BEAM?
The annoying thing is that if I knew my way around the compiler,
it would be easier to add this than to write it up.

Here's some text to go in the documentation:
>     is_integer(Term, LB, UB) -> bool()
> 
>     Types:
>         Term = term()
>         LB = integer()
>         UB = integer()
> 
> Returns true if Term is an integer lying between LB
> and UB inclusive (LB =< Term, Term =< UB); otherwise
> returns false.  In an expression, raises an exception
> if LB or UB is not an integer.  Having UB < LB is not
> an error.
> 
> Allowed in guard tests.



Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
