    Author: Cons T Åhs <cons(at)erlang(dot)org>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Erlang-Version: OTP25
    Created: 4-Oct-2021
    Post-History:
****
EEP 60: Introduce Support for Experimental Features
----

Abstract
========

This EEP provides a suggestion on how to allow support for enabling
and disabling language features.  This will, e.g., allow users to try
out, comment on, and suggest changes to new or proposed language
features before they are made final.  It will also make it possible to
avoid using a new language feature, thus making it possible to
transition slower, e.g., on a file by file basis, when a new backwards
incompatible feature is introduced.  Currently this is mainly focused
on changes in the language itself, but it can be used for changes in,
e.g., the runtime as well.

Rationale
=========

Other languages support the possibility to experiment with different
language features.  See the [Erlang Experimental Language Features
Investigation Report][1] by Kjell Winblad for some
examples.  _This report is included verbatim as an appendix._

Motivation
==========

We want the possibility to evolve the Erlang/OTP by adding new
constructs and remove or change the semantics of existing constructs.
Before finalising a new feature as part of the language, it is
convenient to allow users to try out a feature in a larger scale
without having to run a separate branch of Erlang/OTP.  This will enable
easier testing of new features as well as facilitating feedback.
Before a new feature becomes a permanent part of Erlang/OTP it should
be possible to select it for use.

Along the same lines, it should be possible to _not_ use a new feature,
especially a feature that changes the semantics of, or removes, an
existing construct.  The advantage of this is that a transistion of a
code base is not forced upon the user when upgrading OTP, but it can
be done in a more timely manner.

This will also lead to a uniform way of documenting and introducing
experimental features at all levels, i.e., language, runtime,
applications and APIs.

We want the possibility to control which features are enabled or
disabled during compilation and in the runtime.  This control can be
made possible by options to the compiler/runtime as well as directives
in the module being compiled.  Good error messages can
then be emitted when required features are not present.

The life cycle of a feature can be seen in the diagram below.

      +--------------+       +----------+
      | Experimental -------> | Approved |
      +---.-------.--+       +-----.----+
          |       |                |
          |       |                |
          |       |                |
          |       |                |
    +-----v----+  |          +-----v-----+
    | Rejected | +---------> | Permanent |
    +----------+             +-----------+

In addition to the possibility of enabling and disabling a feature, a
feature can be enabled by default.  There will also be various ways of
getting information about features (details below).  Some of this is
summarised in the following table.

| State        | Default  | Controllable | Available |
|:-------------|:---------|:-------------|:----------|
| Experimental | disabled | yes          | yes       |
| Approved     | enabled  | yes          | yes       |
| Permanent    | enabled  | no           | yes       |
| Rejected     | disabled | no           | no        |

Notes:

* Being _controllable_ means the possibility to enable or disable by
  means of compiler options and directives in the module being
  compiled.
* Being _available_ can be seen using the preprocessor macro
  `FEATURE_AVAILABLE` and with functions in the `erl_features` module.

Details
=======

Modifications for enabling and disabling features or getting
information about features need to be added to at least the following
modules or general areas:

* `erlc` - options handling
* `erl_scan` - handling of keywords
* `epp` - handling directives and changes to keyword set
* `erl_parse` (possibly) - new grammar rules for specific features
* The preprocessor
* `erl_lint` - changes for specific features
* `erl_expand_records` - changes for specific features
* `beam_asm`
* Functions in the `compile` module for handling options
* The `-feature(..).` directive in a module
* The runtime system - option handling and module loading
* A special module holding the current status of features
* `erl_eval` - changes for specific features
* Parse transforms

A new module `erl_features` will be added to provide detailed
information about features as well as support functions for feature
handling.

In the following, we use some non existing features in the examples.
These are, without further explanations at this point, the features
`maybe_expr` (see EEP49), `module_alias` and `ieee754float`.

Options to `erlc`
-----------------

The compiler wrapper `erlc` shall be extended with four new options,
two for enabling and disabling features and two for getting
information about features.  The first two both take a feature name,
being an atom, as argument.  Several instances are allowed.

1. `-enable-feature <feature-name>` Turns on the selected feature.
2. `-disable-feature <feature-name>` Turns off the seleced feature.
3. `-list-features` Present a list of current features and a short
   description.
4. `describe-feature <feature-name>` Present a longer description of
   the feature.

Additional `+` style options will be understood by the compiler.

1. `+'{enable_feature,<feature-name>}'` -- see above.
2. `+'{disable_feature,<feature-name>}'` -- see above.
3. `+warn_keywords` -- generate warnings for used atoms that are
   keywords in some existing feature.
4. `+nowarn_keywords` -- prevent warnings as above.

* The default is to _not_ warn about atoms that are keywords in an
  existing available feature.
* For both enabling and disabling features, it is possible to use the
  atom `all` to enable or disable all available features.

Note: An alternative to the first two `+` options is a tuple with
three elements, i.e., `{feature, enable | disable, <feature-name>}`.
This has the advantage of being more consistent with the format of the
`-feature` directive (see below).

### Examples

* `erlc -enable-feature module_alias` indicates that the feature
  `module_alias` is to be used when compiling the file.
* `erlc -enable-feature ieee754float -disable-feature module_alias`
  indicates that the feature `ieee754float` is be to used when
  compiling the file, but that the feature `module_alias` is not.  In
  effect, using an instance of the `module_alias` should thus generate
  an error.

Preprocessor Additions
----------------------

Add preprocessor macros to enable checking whether a specific feature
is available or enabled.  We add two predefined macros:

* `FEATURE_AVAILABLE(F)` -- `true` when feature `F` is available in the
  current release.  For an unknown feature this will be `false`.
* `FEATURE_ENABLED(F)` -- `true` when feature `F` is enabled at the
  current location in code.  For an unknown feature this will be `false`.

A use case for having both macros is that one can use
`FEATURE_AVAILABLE` to determine whether a feature is available and,
if so, enable it.  This will make it easier to write code working in
several releases of OTP over a longer time.  The macro
`FEATURE_ENABLED` can then be used for code sections with alternative
implementations.

### Examples

    -if(?FEATURE_AVAILABLE(maybe_expr)).
    %% Use the feature when available
    -feature(enable, maybe_expr).
    -endif.

    -if(?FEATURE_ENABLED(maybe_expr)).
    %% code that use the feature
    -else.
    %% alternative code not using the feature
    -endif.

    %% ..the above also allows simple negative tests
    -if(not ?FEATURE_ENABLED(ieee754float)).
    ..
    -endif.

Options to Functions in `compile`
----------------------------------

Functions in `compile` that take an options arguments, i.e., `file/2`,
`forms/2`, `noenv_file/2` and `noenv_forms/2` should be extended so
that the options `{enable_feature, atom()}` and `{disable_feature,
atom()}` are also recognized.

New `-feature(enable|disable, <feature>)` directive
---------------------------------------------------------

A new `-feature(..)` directive with two arguments is added.  It is
only allowed after the `-module(..)` declaration and in a _prefix_ of
the file up to any directives that _uses_ syntax, e.g., a record
definition, an `-export(..).` or a function definition.  Preprocessor
directives, macro definitions and includes are allowed, but the
_prefix_ will end if any of these contain/result in any of the above.
The _prefix_ concept is extended to cover included files as well,
meaning that the _prefix_ can both be active and ended in an included
file.

If the first argument is `enable` (`disable`) the feature given by the
second argument is enabled (disabled) for the module being compiled.

Several instances of the `-feature` directive are allowed.  An
instance of `-feature` directive in a module will take precedence over
options given to the compiler.  In effect, enabling and disabling
features will have a _last write wins_ semantics.

When compiling a module, a feature will be considered to be _used_
when it has been enabled, even when there are no actual uses of the
feature in the module.

Options to the runtime
----------------------

Similar to the options to `erlc` for compiling a module, when starting
the runtime, e.g., with `erl`, we should be able to specify which
features we allow.  This means that when loading a module it can be
rejected due to using, i.e., being compiled with, a feature we do not
allow.  The reasoning behind this is that one might want to allow
features during testing and development, but be more careful about
allowing them in production.

The options should be named the same as the options to `erlc`, i.e.,
`-enable-feature` and `-disable-feature`.

It is not possible to change the set of enabled features _after_
startup.

Informational Module
--------------------

A module named `erl_features` is used to obtain information about the
status of known features.

New functions to get information about features:

### Get Features available in current release

    features() -> [atom()]

### Get Information about a given feature

    feature_info(atom()) -> FeatureInfoMap
    when
    Description :: string(),
    Type :: extension | backwards_incompatible_change,
    FeatureInfoMap ::
       #{description := Description,
         short := Description,
         type := Type,
         keywords := [atom()],
         experimental => Release,
         approved => Release,
         permanent => Release,
         rejected => Release,
         status := experimental
                 | approved
                 | permanent
                 | rejected
         }
    Release :: non_neg_integer()

    %% As above, but give the feature info for a given release
    feature_info(atom(), Release) -> Result

Description of keys:

* `description` - detailed description of feature.
* `short` - short, one liner blurb, describing feature.
* `type` - the nature of the feature, i.e., a conservative extension
  or backwards incompatible change.
* `keywords` - new keywords introduced by the feature.
* `status` - the current state of the feature, each state having a
  corresponding key stating when the feature entered that state.

  Note that all of the keys `experimental`, `approved`, `permanent`
  and `rejected` will not be present, but only those up to the current
  state as seen in the life cycle diagram above.

This can be of use for internal and external tools to:

* Warn about usage of a feature that will be removed.
* Give an error when trying to use a feature that is not present
  (anymore)
* Tell the compiler which options it needs to use to activate a
  certain experimental feature
* Automatically remove or warn about instances of the
  `-feature(..)` directive when it is no longer neccessary
* Automatically give information about which features have become
  permanent (or approved) between two releases.  This can be used to
  give the user information about what needs to be changed before an
  upgrade is made.

The `erl_features` module will also contain support functions for the
actual handling of features, e.g., dynamic keyword handling, but these
are implementation dependent and for internal use, so will not be
further documented here.

Implementation Notes
======================

* Since we have the feature options present both in the compiler
  frontend and the runtime, a compiled module needs to indicate which
  features have been allowed (or used).  This will be done by
  recording the features used in a new chunk named `Meta` in the beam
  file.  Upon a load attempt in the runtime, the used features will be
  checked against the features enabled in the runtime.  If the module
  to be loaded uses features that are not enabled, the load will be
  disallowed.
* While it might be possible to implement a new language feature only
  in the frontend, i.e., in essence by a high level macro or parse
  transform, and thus be rather confident it doesn't have any affects on later
  stages of the compiler or runtime (as long as the transformed code
  is correct), we do not record that level of granularity of feature
  implementation.  We might, after all, change the implementation at
  a later stage.

Examples
========

Support for the new `maybe .. else .. end` expression (as described in
EEP49) will be implemented using the feature mechanism.  This will be
done using the feature name `maybe_expr` and it will initially have
the status `experimental`.  This will give the community a good
opportunity to try it out and give feedback before making it a
permanent part of the language.

When compiling a  module that uses `maybe`, the feature `maybe_expr`
needs to be enabled.  This can be done in several ways:

1. Use the option to `erlc`, i.e., `erlc -enable-feature maybe_expr`
2. Use the possibility for `+` options, i.e., `erlc
   +'{enable_feature,maybe_expr}'`
3. Use a directive in the module being compiled, i.e.,
   `-feature(enable, maybe_expr).`

To ease the transition of a code base or allow the use in (earlier)
releases where the feature is not available, one can use the
introduced macros.  Enabling of the feature can be done using the
compiler options described above.  Alternatively, with the code below,
one can enable the feature if `use_maybe` is defined.

     -ifdef(use_maybe).
     -feature(enabled, maybe_expr).
     -endif.

     -if(?FEATURE_ENABLED(maybe_expr)).
     %% Code using the maybe expression
     foo(..) ->
        maybe
        X ?= ..
        end.
     -else.
     %% Alternative (old?) implementation not using maybe
     foo(..) ->
       ..
     -endif.

If the module is compiled with `maybe_expr` enabled, this will be
recorded in the beam file (in the new `Meta` chunk).  To allow loading
of the module in the runtime, the feature `maybe_expr` must be enabled
using the `enable-feature` option.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Some possible scenarios in terms of different OTP releases and modules
with features:

* A module compiled with a feature enabled and recorded in the `Meta`
  chunk can be loaded into a (presumably older) OTP release that does
  not know about the existence of the chunk.  There might be other
  things preventing the loading, e.g., the use of a new BEAM
  instruction.
* A module containing `-feature` directives cannot be
  compiled by a (presumably older) OTP release that does not know
  about features.  Since the format (with two arguments) is different
  from that of attributes (one argument) an error will be generated.

Reference Implementation
========================

An implementation is currently ongoing.  The following is currently
supported:

* long options to `erlc`
    * `-enable-feature ..`
    * `-disable-feature ..`
* `+` options to `erlc`, e.g., `+'{enable_feature, maybe_expr}'`
* Using `+warn_keywords` and `+nowarn_keywords` to `erlc` is
  understood.  Warnings generated from `erl_lint`.
* Inline compiler directives
    * `-feature(enable, ..).`
    * `-feature(disable, ..).`
  These are only allowed in a defined _prefix_ of a file.
* Handling of features options in `compile:file/2`
* Macros `FEATURE_AVAILABLE` and `FEATURE_ENABLED`, both of arity 1.
  The macro `FEATURE_ENABLED` is changed dynamically when the set of
  features enabled changes when seeing instances of the `-feature`
  directive.
* Dynamic changing of the set of keywords (reserved words), i.e.,
  reacting to the options above for enabling/disabling features.
* Some error handling in detecting and reporting attempted use of
  currently unknown features.
* Most of the `erl_features` module, both with functions described in this
  document and support functions for handling changes in set of
  keywords (reserved words).
* A new chunk (currently named `Meta`) is added to the beam file when
  compiling a module.  Thus chunk contains information about the
  features used (as seen by options set, not if the features was
  actually present) when the module is compiled.  The chunk can be
  extended to include other meta information in the future.
* Giving options to `erl` to enable and disable features is possible.
  Modules that use features that have not been enabled will not load
  into the system.
* Warnings about atoms that are keywords for existing features
  can be given (using `+warn_keywords` to `erlc`).

Future Work
===========

* Provide a guide for where to implement different support for a new
  feature and how one can access the setup of features required.
* Similar to the `-std=..` option to `gcc` specifiying which language
  standard to compile with one could add a similar option to `erlc`
  etc.  In short that would be a way to name the collective of all
  language features being enabled by default in a specific release.
  Naming the option `-lang` using `-lang=otp24` would mean that we
  want to compile the input file with all, and only those, features
  enabled by default in OTP24, even if `erlc` is from the OTP25
  release.  Any features added in OTP25 would thus not be allowed.  It
  would be allowed, though, if one added the `enable-feature` option,
  e.g.,   `erlc -lang=otp24 -enable-feature module_alias`

References
==========

[1]: https://gist.github.com/kjellwinblad/1bba90134379a76b70fc0b367b7c50b4
    "Erlang Experimental Language Features Invesigation Report"

Appendix
========

This is the original report by Kjell Winblad [report][1].  Some of
this should be copied elsewhere to the document as it provides a good
background with regards to other languages and set the foundation.

Erlang Experimental Language Features Investigation Report
==========================================================

Erlang currently does not support selectively using experimental
language features that are not officially part of the Erlang
language. Having support for doing so can help users try out and
experiment with a potential extension to the language without adding
this extension to the main language. This report looks into how
support for selectively including experimental language features looks
in other languages and how such support might look in Erlang.

Support for Selectively Enabling Experimental Language Features in Other Languages
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Python

Pyhton has support for making language extensions or changes optional
before they become mandatory. The Python module
[`__future__`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/__future__.html)
defines several feature names like this:

    FeatureName = _Feature(OptionalRelease, MandatoryRelease,
                           CompilerFlag)

* **OptionalRelease** is the release in which one could first
  optionally enable the feature
* **MandatoryRelease** is the release when the feature became/"is
  planned to be" mandatory
* **CompilerFlag** is the compiler flags that need to be passed to the
  compile module function to enable the feature

Python has a [special
statement](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/simple_stmts.html#future)
that needs to be placed near the top of a python module to enable a
language feature in a specific module. Statements to enable features
that have already become mandatory have no effect.

In Python, feature names are never removed from the `__future__`
module, which means that the `__future__` module contains a history of
language changes.

Some of the benefits of Pythons future import statement and __future__
module are:

* Users can start migrating code module by module before using a
  release in which a potential backward incompatible change is made
  mandatory.
* Users can start to experiment with language extensions before they
  are enabled by default
* A problem with a language extension can be found and fixed (or the
  language extension can be removed) before it is made mandatory
* A programmatically accessible history of language changes is
  accessible through the `__future__` module. Tools can use this
  history, for example, to remove `from __future__ import
  x`-statements that are no longer necessary.

### Ruby

Ruby does not have special support for experimental features
(experimental features are just documented as experimental in the
documentation). See [this
issue](https://bugs.ruby-lang.org/issues/15966) that proposes using
command line flags to enable experimental features for more
information.

### Rust

Rust has a [special syntax](https://doc.rust-lang.org/unstable-book/)
for activating experimental language features. Here is one example:

    #![feature(box_syntax)]

    fn main() {
        let five = box 5;
    }

Such features are called unstable in Rust's terminology. They might
change or disappear at any time.

One activates the feature for the current compilation unit (crate).

### Haskell

Haskell makes it possible to activate certain language features with a
pragma in the file header:

    {-# LANGUAGE TemplateHaskell #-}

### Java

Java lets users test features that are planned for a later
release. This needs to be enabled by passing compiling flags to the
compiler when compiling the Java file:

`javac --enable-preview --release 12 # other flags`

The line above can enable language features planned for Java version
12 in earlier Java versions before Java version 12 is released. To
limit the use of preview features, one also has to pass
`-enable-preview` when running a Java program compiled using the
`-enable-preview` flag. A warning message is always printed when a
preview feature is used.

When one enables preview features for a specific release in java, one
gets all preview features from that release. It is not possible to
select a single feature.

Features are not released as a preview feature unless they are
considered good enough to be included without
modifications. Therefore, changes to preview features are relatively
rare but can happen.

See [here](https://nipafx.dev/enable-preview-language-features/) for more details.

Suggestion for Erlang
---------------------

The following methods may be used to activate an experimental feature:

* `-compile().` directive inside a file,
* an option passed to one of the compile functions in the `compile`
  module or,
* a compilation flag passed to `erlc`.

The option/flag to enable an experimental feature can have a prefix
and the experimental future's name:

Examples:

    -compile([{enable_experimental, pinning_operator}]).

    compile:file(File, [{enable_experimental,pinning_operator}])

    erlc -enable_experimental_pinning_operator

In the above examples, `enable_experimental` is the prefix and
`pinning_operator` is the experimental feature's name.

All experimental features currently existing and that have existed in
the past can be "documented" in a special module (similar to
Pyhton). Let us assume that this module is called
`experimental_features`. This module can be public to allow external
tools to use the module or internal only if we want to be able to make
changes to its API.

The `experimental_features` module has functions that can be used to
obtain information about experimental features:

`list_experimental_features() -> [atom()].`

This function returns a list of all experimental features that are
currently existing and that have existed.

    get_experimental_feature_info(FeatureName) -> Result when
    FeatureName :: atom(),
    description :: string(),
    Type :: extension | backwords_incompatible_change,
    Result :: missing | FeatureInfoMap,
    FeatureInfoMap :: #{optional_release := ReleaseNr,
                    status := experimental | %% May be removed
                                             %% or changed
                              {remove_planned, ReleaseNr,
                               AdditionalInfo :: string()} |
                              {inclusion_planned, ReleaseNr} |
                              {removed, ReleaseNr,
                               AdditionalInfo :: string()},
                              {included, ReleaseNr}
                     %% list of compiler options that needs
                     %% to be given to activate this feature
                     %% (this can be useful, for example, when
                     %% one experimental feature depend on another)
                    compiler_options := list()
                   },
    ReleaseNr : {Major :: integer(),
                 Minor :: integer(),
                 Patch :: integer(),
                 Label :: string()}.

This function returns information associated with a given feature name.

External and internal tools may use the information that one can get
from the `experimental_features` module to:

* Warn about the usage of something that will be removed
* Give error if something that has got removed is used
* Tell the compiler which options it should use to activate a certain
  experimental feature
* Automatically remove {enable_experimental,x} tuples from -compile()
  directives when they are no longer necessary.
* Automatically give information about which features become mandatory
  between two releases (which can give the user information about what
  needs to be changed before an upgrade is made)

### Preventing that Experimental Features are used too Much in Production Code

Similar to Java we can emit information that an experimental feature
is used in the compiled module. The VM can use this information to
print a warning message when running a module that contains an
experimental feature. We can also force usage of a special flag when
running code that are compiled with an experimental feature.

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal
license, whichever is more permissive.

[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
[VimVar]: <> " vim: set fileencoding=utf-8 expandtab shiftwidth=4 softtabstop=4: "
