    Author: Richard A. O'Keefe <ok(at)cs(dot)otago(dot)ac(dot)nz>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Erlang-Version: R12B-4
    Created: 28-Nov-2008
    Post-History:
****
EEP 25: Unnesting cases
----



Abstract
========

Erlang 'case' expressions should adopt/adapt an idea from
Algol 68 that in Erlang would strictly generalise 'cond'.



Specification
=============

Currently a 'case' expression has the form

    'case' Expression 'of'
          Pattern ['when' Guard] '->' Expression
     {';' Pattern ['when' Guard] '->' Expression}...
    'end'

It is well known that Algol 68 had

    if .. then .. {elif .. then ..}... [else ..] fi

expressions.  It is less well known that it had a similar
construction for case expression,

    case .. in ... {ouse .. in ..}... [out ..] esac

where "ouse" (from "OUt caSE") let you iterate the case
matching process and only need one 'esac'.

This proposal adopts the Algol 68 idea.
The revised form is

    'case' Expression 'of'
          Pattern ['when' Guard] '->' Expression
     {';' Pattern ['when' Guard] '->' Expression}...
    {';' 'or' 'case' Expression 'of'	
          Pattern ['when' Guard] '->' Expression
     {';' Pattern ['when' Guard] '->' Expression}...}...
    'end'



Motivation
==========

Consider this example:

    suffix(P, Suffix, List)
      when is_function(P, 2), is_list(Suffix) ->
	suffix_loop(P, Suffix, List).

    suffix_loop(P, Suffix, List) ->
	case equal(P, Suffix, List)
	  of true  -> true
	   ; false -> case List
			of [_|Tail] -> suffix_loop(P, Suffix, Tail)
			 ; []       -> false
		      end
	end.

With this proposal we could write

    suffix_loop(P, Suffix, List) ->
	case equal(P, Suffix, List)
	  of true     -> true
	; or case List
          of [_|Tail] -> suffix_loop(P, Suffix, Tail)
	   ; []       -> false
	end.
	   
where all the alternatives to be selected have the same
indentation.

The old proposal for a Lisp-like 'cond' is no longer really
needed.  Instead of

    cond
        C1 -> B1
      ; C2 -> B2
      ...
      ; Cn -> Bn
    end

one writes

    case      C1 of true -> B1
    ; or case C2 of true -> B2
    ...
    ; or case Cn of true -> Bn
    end

What one loses here is the check that a result that is not
'true' must be 'false', but that job can these days be done
by the Dialyzer.  This is certainly clumsier than 'cond',
but it achieves the main aim, that of selecting from a bunch
of choices at the same logical (and therefore at the same
indentation) level by means of a series of Boolean-valued
expressions, but it is strictly more general.  It allows you
to combine Boolean-valued expressions with guards (including
any future generalisations of guards), and it allows you to
make a choice based on any kind of pattern matching, not just
Boolean.

This is clumsier than 'cond', but over-using Boolean when some
more intention-revealing enumeration should be used is an
anti-pattern that has been recognised for over 20 years.  If
'cond' existed, there would be a strong pressure for people
to write functions that return a Boolean result when something
else might be more useful, just so they could use 'cond'.  
As an example, suppose that we want to continue if the voltage
is nominal, shut the device off if the voltage is low and there
is not an emergency, or set the speed slow if the voltage is
low and there is an emergency.

With cond:

    cond voltage_nominal() -> continue_operations()
       ; in_emergency()    -> set_speed_slow()
       ; true              -> shut_device_down()
    end

With case:

    case      voltage() of nominal  -> continue_operations()
    ; or case status() of emergency -> set_speed_slow()
                        ; normal    -> shut_device_down()
    end

When expressed this way, I for one find it easier to realise
that "low" is not the opposite of "nominal"; a voltage that is
not nominal might be high.  So we really should have

    case      voltage() of nominal   -> continue_operations()
                         ; high      -> WHAT DO WE DO HERE?
    ; or case status()  of emergency -> set_speed_slow()
    		     ; normal    -> shut_device_down()
    end

So an approach that gives you the "flat" structure of 'cond'
while subtly encouraging the multiway thinking of 'case' has
merit.  You could say that I am not so much for 'ouse' as
against 'cond' and over-use of Boolean.



Rationale
=========

I read one too many "why doesn't Erlang have an if" e-message,
and suddently remember "Algol 68 could do that with 'case'".

The main issue is how to spell 'ouse' in Erlang.  My first
preference was for 'or case', but that can't work.  I do not
love "; or case", and would be very happy to see something
better.  Indeed, "; case" might do the job, I just felt that
that was a bit too error-prone.



Backwards Compatibility
=======================

All existing Erlang code remains acceptable with unchanged
semantics.  The implementation will be entirely in the parser,
so even tools that examine ASTs will be unaffected.



Reference Implementation
========================

None yet.  It will be entirely in the parser.



Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
