    Author: Richard A. O'Keefe <ok(at)cs(dot)otago(dot)ac(dot)nz>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Erlang-Version: R12B-4
    Created: 23-Jul-2008
    Post-History:
****
EEP 17: Fix andalso and orelse
----



Abstract
========

Erlang 5.1 added the ability to use 'andalso', 'orelse',
'and', and 'or' in guards.  However, the semantics for
'andalso' and 'orelse' differs from that in other related
languages, causing confusion and inefficiency.

I propose making 'andalso' and 'orelse' work like Lisp
AND and OR respectively.



Specification
=============

Currently, (E1 andalso E2) as an expression acts like

    case E1
     of false -> false
      ; true  -> case E2 
                   of false -> false
                    ; true  -> true
                 end
    end

except that in my tests the former raises `{badarg,NonBool}`
exceptions and the latter raises `{case_clause,NonBool}` ones.

This should be changed to

    case E1
      of false -> false
       ; true   -> E2
    end.

Currently, (E1 orelse E2) as an expression acts like

    case E1
      of true  -> true
       ; false -> case E2
                    of true  -> true
                     ; false -> false
                  end
    end

except that in my tests the former raises `{badarg,NonBool}`
exceptions and the latter raises `{case_clause,NonBool}` ones.

This should be changed to

    case E1
      of true  -> true
       ; false -> E2
    end

There is apparently a folklore belief that using 'andalso' (or
'orelse') in a guard will somehow give you better code than using
',' (or ';').  On the contrary, you will get rather worse code.
See "Motivation" for an example.  This should change.

    guard ::= gconj {';' gconj}*
    gconj ::= gtest {',' gtest}*
    gtest ::= '(' guard ')' | ...

First, we allow ',' and ';' to nest, using parentheses.
Second, we rule that as outer operators in a guard, the
only difference between ',' and 'andalso' is precedence,
and the only difference between ';' and 'orelse' is also
precedence.  In a guard test like

    is_atom(X andalso Y)

the 'andalso' cannot be replaced by ',', but whenever one
COULD be replaced by the other, they should have the same effect.


Motivation
==========

### Cultural consistency ###

* Common Lisp

        (defun member-p (X Xs)
          (and (consp Xs)
               (or (equal X (first Xs))
                   (member-p X (rest Xs)))))

* Scheme

        (define (member? X Xs)
          (and (pair? Xs)
               (or (equal? X (car Xs))
                   (member? X (cdr Xs)))))

* Standard ML

        fun is_member(x, xs) =
            not (null xs) andalso (
            x = hd xs orelse is_member(x, tl xs))

* Haskell

        x `is_member_of` xs =
           not (null xs) && (x == head xs || x `is_member_of` tail xs)

* Dylan

    I don't know Dylan syntax well enough to finish this
    example, but I do know that '&' and '|' in Dylan are exactly
    like AND and OR in Common Lisp except for syntax.  (They are
    documented as allowing the right operand to return anything,
    including multiple values.)

* Python

        def is_member(x, xs):
            n = len(xs)
            return n > 0 and (x == xs[0] or is_member(x, xs[1:n]))

    I'm not perfectly sure about this, but the reference manual
    is very explicit that the second operand of 'and' or 'or' can
    be anything.

* Smalltalk

    Doing this example this way in Smalltalk requires considerable
    pain in going against the grain of Smalltalk, however the
    'and:' and 'or:' selectors in Smalltalk DO check that their
    first argument is Boolean and DON'T check anything about (the
    result of) their second argument.

In all of these, the "and" and "or" operations work exactly the
same way, and in the languages whose implementations support tail
recursion (Common Lisp, Scheme, Standard ML, Haskell), the
function shown above is tail recursive.  (I could have added more
languages to the list.)

Erlang stands out.  The behaviour of 'andalso' is surprising, and
the fact that 'andalso' and 'orelse' block tail recursion is quite
astonishing.  I am all in favour of giving programmers shocks that
teach them something useful about programming, but this one is not
a useful lesson.  Testing both arguments of 'and' and 'or' makes
sense, because the code executed for those operators always GETS
the values of both operands.  But 'andalso' and 'orelse' only test
their second operand SOME of the time.

    X = 1, X >= 0 andalso X    % checked error
    X = 1, X < 0 andalso X     % unchecked error

There doesn't seem to be much point in checking SOME of the time,
especially when it does something as dramatic as blocking tail
recursion.



### Guards code ###

As for guards, here is a small example

    f(X) when X >= 0, X < 1 -> math:sqrt(X).

This compiles to the following rather obvious code:

    function, f, 1, 2}.
      {label,1}.
        {func_info,{atom,bar},{atom,f},1}.
      {label,2}.
        {test,is_ge,{f,1},[{x,0},{integer,0}]}.
        {test,is_lt,{f,1},[{x,0},{integer,1}]}.
        {call_ext_only,1,{extfunc,math,sqrt,1}}.

Some people expect 'andalso' to do as well or better.
I expected it to do the same, and this EEP requires it to.
Here's the source code:

    g(X) when X >= 0 andalso X < 1 -> math:sqrt(X).

and here are the BEAM instructions:

    {function, g, 1, 4}.
      {label,3}.
        {func_info,{atom,bar},{atom,g},1}.
      {label,4}.
        {allocate,1,1}.
        {move,{x,0},{y,0}}.
        {test,is_ge,{f,5},[{x,0},{integer,0}]}.
        {bif,'<',{f,7},[{x,0},{integer,1}],{x,0}}.
        {jump,{f,6}}.
      {label,5}.
        {move,{atom,false},{x,0}}.
      {label,6}.
        {test,is_eq_exact,{f,7},[{x,0},{atom,true}]}.
        {move,{y,0},{x,0}}.
        {call_ext_last,1,{extfunc,math,sqrt,1},1}.
      {label,7}.
        {move,{y,0},{x,0}}.
        {deallocate,1}.
        {jump,{f,3}}.

It not only does a lot more work, it even allocates a stack
frame that the traditional code does not.



Rationale
=========

There are several ways to deal with the surprising behaviour
of 'andalso' and 'orelse'.

0.  Leave things the way they are.

    The manual should have lots of warnings added,
    saying not to use these operators, because they block
    tail recursion and are inefficient in guards.

    It is reasonable to address other issues first, but it just
    will not do long term.  You don't have to rush around
    bandaging everyone you meet, but you shouldn't build pit
    traps in front of them either.

1.  Remove them from the language.

    I would prefer this.  And that goes double for 'and' and 'or',
    which seem to be completely pointless, as well as confusing.
    I do not think this would be practical politics.

2.  Add new operators with sensible semantics.

    But what would we call them?  'and' and 'or' are taken,
    and both '|' and '||' are used for something else.  Above
    all, 'andalso' and 'orelse' would still be there, and still
    be surprising (in a bad way).  We have too many ways to
    spell "or" as it is.

3.  Fix them.

As for the recommendation that ',' and ';' should nest,
I want Erlang to be simple to think.  If 'andalso' and 'orelse'
are to act like ',' and ';' in guards -- which I've argued
above -- then clearly ',' and ';' should act like 'andalso'
and 'orelse' in guards.



Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Any code that ran without raising exceptions will continue
to produce the same results, except for running faster.

Code that did raise exceptions may raise different exceptions
elsewhere later, or may quietly complete in unexpected ways.
I believe it to be unlikely that anyone deliberately relied
on (E1 andelse 0) raising an exception.

Code that was previously broken because these operators have
such surprising behaviour will now work in more cases.



Reference Implementation
========================

None.



Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
