    Author: Sergey Prokhorov <seriy(dot)pr(at)gmail(dot)com>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 14-Sep-2021
    Erlang-Version: 25
    Post-History:
****
EEP 58: Map comprehensions
----


Abstract
========

This EEP proposes syntax and semantics for map comprehensions and
generators, similar to list and binary comprehensions and generators,
but operating on maps and map iterators.

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.


Specification
=============

Maps and the initial map comprehension syntax and semantics were proposed
in EEP-43. List and binary comprehensions were specified post-fact
in EEP-12. This EEP is based on those two EEPs.

The syntax construct commonly referred as a "comprehension" is, in fact,
composed of 3 semi-independent parts:

- the "generator" - is the expression that iterates over the container,
  matches each element of the container over a pattern and binds the
  variables which can be used in the "comprehensions" and the "filters".
- the "comprehension" - is the expression that is executed for each
  element produced by the generator that successfully matched the pattern
  and passed the "filter" check. The value produced by this expression
  is appended to the resulting generated container.
- the "filter" - is the expression that is evaluated for each element
  produced by the generator that matched the pattern and returns a
  boolean result: when it returns `false`, the current element is
  skipped from being passed to the "comprehension"; when it results
  in `true`, the element is passed to the "comprehension".

So, in this document we are going to keep this separation, but
sometimes will refer to the whole combination of the comprehension, the filter and
the generator as a "comprehension", because the generator syntax is not
used outside of the comprehension context.


### Syntax

The proposed syntax for the map comprehension part is

    '#{' KeyExpr '=>' ValueExpr '||' GeneratorsFilters '}'

Where `GeneratorsFilters` are one or more list/map/binary generators
and/or filters, separated by a comma.

The proposed syntax for the map generator part is

    KeyPattern ':=' ValuePattern '<-' MapOrIteratorExpr

Example combination of map comprehension and map generator

    #{Key => Value || Key := Value <- MapOrIterator}

Map comprehension may be combined with list or binary generator and
vice-versa

    [{Key, Value} || Key := Value <- MapOrIterator]
    #{K => K || K <- List}
    #{K => V || <<K, V>> <= Binary}

`MapOrIterator` is any Erlang expression that evaluates to `map()`
or `maps:iterator()` datatype.

### Semantics

Map comprehension should be semantically equivalent to the
`maps:from_list/1` call over a list comprehension producing
a list of 2-tuples:

    #{K => V || ...}

is equivalent to

    maps:from_list([{K, V} || ...])


Map generator should be semantically equivalent to the list generator
running over the result of `maps:to_list/1`, when the input is a
map datatype:

    #{ ... || K := V <- Map}

is equivalent to

    #{ ... || {K, V} <- maps:to_list(Map)}

And for `maps:iterator()` as input - it can't be easily expressed as
equivalent list generator. But the idea is that it's equivalent to
the consumption of the iterator by repetitive calls to `maps:next/1`
and matching `Key` and `Value` over key and value patterns
accordingly on each iteration loop.

Map generator should raise `error({bad_generator, ExprResult})`
if the `MapOrIterator` expression evaluation produced anything but
map or map iterator.

Key pattern is allowed to be catch-all / contain unbound variables
(which is not allowed in other map pattern-matching contexts).

Variable binding and shadowing rules should be the same as for list
and binary comprehensions (which follows from the equivalence rules
described above).

Rationale
=========

### Syntax for arrow, generator pattern and comprehension key-value pair

We decided to go with the syntax proposed in EEP-43.

`#{ .. }` were chosen for the outer tokens of map comprehension
because the same are used when constructing a new map - rule similar to
list and binary comprehensions.

`K := V <-` is not ambiguous for the parser, so unlike binary
generator, there is no need for a new arrow. `<-` was chosen over
`<=` because the latter is less visually distinguishable when it is
placed relatively close to the `=>` and `:=` tokens:

    #{K => V || K := V <= Map}.
    % vs
    #{K => V || K := V <- Map}.

`KeyPattern := ValuePattern` is the same syntax that is used in
map pattern-matching (however, in map generators KeyPattern is also
allowed to be a match-all / unbound variable).

`KeyExpr => ValueExpr` is the same syntax that is used for the new
map construction.

### Order in which map generator yields key-value pairs

Since maps do not have any order specified, the order in which the
generator would yield key-value pairs should not be guaranteed (same
way as the ordering of the list, resulting from `maps:to_list/1` is
not guaranteed).

### Behavior when comprehension produced duplicate keys

Same as `maps:from_list/1`: the latest (right-most) value is used
and the previous values are ignored. It might be less predictable
when a map comprehension is used in combination with a map generator
(because the map generator order is not defined), but is important when
a map comprehension is used with a list or a binary generator.

### Whether to allow map iterator as input for map generator

Map iterators are allowed in `maps:filter/2`, `maps:fold/3` and
`maps:map/2`. Since comprehensions are often used in the same
contexts as those functions, it makes sense to allow map iterators
so comprehensions could be used as a drop-in replacement for the
aforementioned functions.

### Map updates via map comprehension

Should map updates be allowed with map-comprehensions? That is should
this be valid syntax:

    M#{ K => V*2 || K := V <- M}

or this

    M#{ K := V*2 || K := V <- M}

There is no final decision about how useful might it be.

More-or-less the same result may be achieved using `maps:merge/2`
function (with less room for optimization).

One (probably minor) argument against it is the fact that the "map update"
syntax is a common reason for very confusing errors programmers make
when they forget to add a comma between two maps:

    > [#{a => b}
       #{a => d}].
    #{a => d}

Here the "map update" syntax has been accidentally created instead of
the intended "list of two maps".

There exists some risk that similar issue might happen with
"update via comprehension":

    my_fun(Map) ->
        Options = #{a => b}
        #{ K => V || K := V <- smth(Map, Options) }.

However probability is lower, since mistake usually happens in literal
definitions, but programmers rarely use comprehensions in literal
definitions.

Motivation
==========

Having comprehensions and generators for lists and binaries, it
seems logical that there should be a generator for maps as well.
For example, Python language has versions of comprehensions for
both lists and dicts (but also generators in comprehensions work for
any iterable).
Another factor is that it's a quite common practice in the code
seen in the wild to use combinations of `maps:from_list/1`,
`maps:to_list/1` with list comprehensions and list high-order
functions in a situations when high-order functions from `maps`
module are not flexible enough (eg, we want to convert map not to
another map, but to some different structure, or to modify both
key and value). But use of `maps:from/to_list` might be a problem
for the performance since it is eager and creates garbage on heap.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

All the existing Erlang code won't be affected, since the syntax
extensions we are proposing in this EEP are not valid syntax in
Erlang right now.
Erlang code written with map comprehensions would be non-parseable
by the older Erlang compiler.
Some of the tools working with intermediate Erlang forms (eg, AST)
have to be updated (eg, parse-transforms). However, we expect
core-erlang form to not be affected - similar to list and binary
comprehensions.

Reference Implementation
========================

The reference implementation is provided in a form of pull-request
on GitHub

    https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/4856


[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: markdown"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
[VimVar]: <> " vim: set fileencoding=utf-8 expandtab shiftwidth=4 softtabstop=4: "
