    Author: José Valim <jose(dot)valim(at)gmail(dot)com>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 02-Jun-2021
    Post-History:
****
EEP 59: Module attributes for documentation
----

Abstract
========

This EEP proposes a structured documentation API for Erlang where the
documentation is handled as part of the language parser and included
directly in the compiled .beam files, as a replacement for EDoc.
Python, Elixir, and Clojure are examples of languages that follow this
approach of treating documentation as data rather than code comments.

Rationale
=========

The main limitation in EDoc today is that the documentation is kept as
code comments.  This requires an explicit tool to parse said code
comments, which complicates access to the docs by IDEs, from the shell,
etc.  There have been recent improvements in this area by making EDoc
compile to EEP 48 but it still requires an explicit step.

Furthermore, the “code comments” approach is more complex implementation
wise, as it requires parsing the source code alongside code comments,
parsing the code comments, and so on.  Personally, I also enjoy the
explicit distinction between documentation and code comments: they have
different requirements and different audiences.

This EEP proposes the addition of two module attributes to Erlang: `-doc`
and `-moduledoc`.  It also includes an extra section on additional features
that can make aid writing documentation, but they are optional and some
of them should likely be explored more in depth in other EEPs.
Still, they are included to provide a long term view of the features and
challenges related to structured documentation.

As with EEP 48, this proposal pertains exclusively to API references and
their documentation.  It doesn't cover guides, tutorials, and other
documentation formats.

New module attributes
=====================

This EEP proposes two new attributes: `-doc` and `-moduledoc`.  They could
be used as follows:

    -module(base64).
    -moduledoc "
    Convenience functions for encoding and decoding from base64.
    ".

    -doc "
    Encodes the given binary to base64.
    ".
    -spec encode(binary()) -> binary().
    encode(Binary) ->
      % ....

    -doc "
    Decodes the given binary from base64.
    ".
    -spec decode(binary()) -> {ok, binary()} | error.
    encode(Binary) ->
      % ....

The new `-moduledoc` attribute can be listed anywhere and it will contain
the documentation for the given module.  The `-doc` attribute must be
listed anywhere before a function and it will contain the documentation
for the following function.  For instance, the example below:

    -doc "Example".
    -spec example() -> ok.
    example() -> ok.

is equivalent to:

    -spec example() -> ok.
    -doc "Example".
    example() -> ok.    

Listing multiple `-doc` attributes with string values for the same
function should warn or error accordingly, unless the documentation
is being set to hidden. For example, this is valid:

    -doc "Example".
    -doc hidden.
    example() -> ok.

But this should warn/error:

    -doc "Example".
    -doc "Updated example".
    example() -> ok.

This as well:

    -doc "Example".
    example(one) -> 1;
    -doc "Updated example".
    example(two) -> 2;

Hidden docs
-----------

The module attribute must either be a string OR the atom `hidden`.
Marking a module as hidden means it won't be part of the doc.
For example, imagine the `base64` module above delegates some of
its logic to a private `base64_impl` module:

    -module(base64_impl).
    -moduledoc hidden.

Note a module may be hidden but individual functions can still be
documented:

    -module(base64_impl).
    -moduledoc hidden.

    -doc "
    Some comments as if it was public.
    ".
    decode64(Binary) ->
      % ...

According to EEP 48, this is intentional. For example, `base64_impl`
should be private for users of the `base64` functionality, but a
developer working directly on the `base64` may still want to access
the docs for `base64_impl` functions directly from their IDE. Each
documentation tool should honor `hidden` accordingly. If no `-doc`
is provided, it defaults to `none` according to EEP 48.

The `-doc` attribute accepts the `hidden` atom too.

File/include docs
-----------------

Some developers prefer to not place the documentation alongside the
source code.  For such cases, `-doc` and `-moduledoc` may also provide
a `{file, Path}`, where `Path` is a relative path from the root of the
project to the documentation source:

    -moduledoc({file, "doc/src/manual/my_module.asciidoc"}).
    -doc({file, "doc/src/manual/my_module.my_function.asciidoc"}).

The file will be read by the compiler and embedded into the chunk at
compilation time.

Private functions
-----------------

It is up for debate if private functions should support the `-doc`
attribute or not.  Elixir warns if this is used, but this has been a
source of complaints in the past.  Given that Erlang declares the
visibility of a function outside of its definition, via the `-export`
attribute, I personally argue that Erlang should allow `-doc` for
non-exported functions, especially to avoid warnings when flags
such as `-compile export_all` are used.  In such cases, however,
the values of the `-doc` attribute should never go to the Docs
chunk, as per EEP 48.

Callbacks and types
-------------------

The `-doc` attribute can also be used to document types and callbacks.
Here, we have two options:

  1. Use the `-doc` attribute
  2. Introduce distinct `-callbackdoc` and `-typedoc` attributes

Those approaches are mostly equivalent.

Metadata
--------

The new module attributes must also support documentation metadata
by passing a map as argument:

    -module(beam64).
    -moduledoc "
    Convenience functions for encoding and decoding from base64.
    ".
    -moduledoc #{
      author => [<<"The Erlang/OTP team">>],
      license => <<"Apache 2 License">>,
      cross_references => [binary]
    }.

If the `-moduledoc` is called multiple times with a map, the maps will
be merged.  This comes with the added benefit that shared metadata can
be moved to a header file:

    %% prelude.hrl
    -moduledoc #{
      authors => [<<"The Erlang/OTP team">>],
      license => <<"Apache 2 License">>
    }.

which we can then include and augment:

    -module(beam64).
    -include("prelude.hrl").
    -moduledoc "
    Convenience functions for encoding and decoding from base64.
    ".
    -moduledoc #{cross_references => [binary]}.

A list of built-in attributes is available on EEP 48.

Compilation
-----------

Compiling a module with the `-moduledoc` or `-doc` attributes will
automatically generate a Docs chunk into its .beam file, making the
documentation directly accessible in the shell.  A `-nodocs` flag can
be added to `erlc` to skip the generation of the chunk.

Release tools should also prune the Documentation chunk out of .beam
files by default.  Note this is already done by `beam_lib:strip_release/1`
and `beam_lib:strip_files/1`.

Documentation format
====================

One important discussion about documentation is what is the documentation
format that the documentation should adopt.  Luckily, EEP 48 is agnostic
to the format, however one must still be listed.  There are a couple
options to this problem:

  1. The Erlang/OTP picks a documentation format as the default for
    the Erlang community, such as AsciiDoc.

  2. The documentation format must be explicitly listed via a new
    attribute called `-docformat`, such as `-docformat "text/asciidoc".`

This proposal does not attempt to discuss the prefered documentation
format, as it is a separate discussion. It is also possible to support
both options above (pick a format but allow it to be overridden).

Other topics
============

This section is going to list other topics, and future extensions,
that are related to this topic but are not required for the
implementation of this EEP.

Unicode binary strings
----------------------

In the examples above, we have used char lists for the documentation.
However, the Docs chunk requires the documentation to be a binary
string. We have a couple of options:

* Support binaries exclusively
* Support lists exclusively with automatic conversion to binaries
  at some point
* Support both prior formats and automatically convert lists to
  binaries at some point - preferably in the parser/compiler,
  to avoid pushing this concern to everyone downstream

The third option is likely the most reasonable for Erlang,
since the `string` module treats both lists and binaries
as strings.

Note that similar concerns apply to documentation metadata.
Attributes such as License, Authors, and so on, are required
to be binaries.  Since those attributes are known upfront, they
can be validated/normalized by the parser/compiler.

With this in mind, it is important to remember that Erlang binaries
are latin1 by default. Therefore, if the documentation contains
non-latin1 characters, one would have to write:

    -doc <<"Documentation about púnctuation"/utf8>>.

Similarly, the Authors metadata:

    -doc #{
      authors => [<<"José Valim"/utf8>>]
    }.

For this reason, the Build and Packaging Working Group of the
Erlang Ecosystem Foundation has also discussed the option of making
Unicode binary strings easier to write in Erlang, such as
`u"Héllò World"`.  While adding such construct is not a direct part
of this EEP, the point made in this subsection is that, if we require
the documentation or its metadata to be a binary, we may need to
provide conveniences for writing UTF-8 binary strings in Erlang.

Triple-quoted strings
---------------------

Another feature often related to structure documentation is
triple-quoted strings.  To understand why they may be useful,
consider the following example that has a double quote in its
documentation:

    -doc "Remove double-quotes (\") from the given string".
    remove_double_quotes(String) ->
      ...

For this reason, we may support triple-quoted strings, which
reads better in multi-line format and reduces the need for
escaping:

    -doc """
    Remove double-quotes (") from the given string
    """.
    remove_double_quotes(String) ->
      ...

Note, however, this is not a strict requirement.  While Python
and Elixir provide this feature, Clojure is a counter example
of a language with structured documentation without
triple-quoted strings.  On the other hand, some features such
as doctests, detailed below, may strongly rely on triple-quoted
strings.

Doctests
--------

A direct consequence of making the documentation more structured
and accessible is that Erlang can include doctests, which is the
ability to run and validate the examples in your documentation.
For example, someone could write this:

    -doc """
    Encodes the given binary to base64.

        1> base64:encode("hello").
        <<"aGVsbG8=">>

    """.
    -spec encode(binary()) -> binary().
    encode(Binary) ->
      % ....

And then in your test suite:

    doctests(_Config) ->
      ct_doctest:run(base64).

The doctest attribute will access the documentation entries in
the base64 Docs chunk, extract all of the examples, and run them.
Of course, while there is nothing stopping doctests from being
implemented on top of EDoc today, this EEP makes doctests
considerably simpler to implement.

Doctests would benefit from a separate EEP, as there are some extra
considerations, as doctesting exceptions, unparseable formats, etc,
but it is worth mentioning them given their benefits to users and
documentation authors.

`warn_missing_doc`
------------------

Another optional feature is to support a `-compile(warn_missing_doc).`
that emits a warning whenever an exported function is not documented.

What about EDoc?
================

If this proposal is to be accepted, what happens with Edoc?

My proposal would be for EDoc to be repurposed with a new backend
that updates the EDoc documentation in existing files to the new
module attribute format.  This way, EDoc can eventually be
deprecated and phased out.

The HTML rendering part of EDoc can be repurposed to work on the Docs
chunk, allowing the Docs chunk to benefit from it.  Another option is
to use [ExDoc](https://github.com/elixir-lang/ex_doc/), which supports
Erlang projects either by running it as an escript or via Rebar3
integration.

Similarly, if the goal is to eventually phase out EDoc, the Erlang/OTP
team needs to discuss what happens with the existing EDoc to XML
conversion in `erl_docgen`.  Two options exist:

* Generate EDoc to XML one last time and use the XML as the source
  from now on

* Convert EDoc to the documentation style in this proposal and teach
  erl_docgen how to convert the Docs chunk to XML

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.

[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
[VimVar]: <> " vim: set fileencoding=utf-8 expandtab shiftwidth=4 softtabstop=4: "
