    Author: Michał Muskała <micmus(at)whatsapp(dot)com>
    Status: Draft
    Type: ...
    Created: 16-12-2024
    Erlang-Version: ...
    Post-History: ...
****
EEP 78: Multi-valued comprehensions
----

Abstract
========

This EEP proposes enhancing the comprehension syntax to allow emitting multiple
elements in a single iteration of the comprehension loop - effectively enhancing
comprehensions to implement `flatmap` with a fixed number of elements.

Rationale
=========

Comprehensions in Erlang are a very flexible and convinent way of implementing many
iteration and looping patterns. However, there are some cases that end up unergonomic,
notably, and where the scope of this EEP is, where we'd like to emit multiple elements
from a single iteration.

Existing forms of expressing this are awkward and introduce extra, unnecessary allocations.
For example:

    lists:append([[X + 1, X + 2] || X <- Xs]
    [Tmp || X <- Xs, Tmp <- [X + 1, X + 2]]

Both of those ways end up creating an extra allocation of a temporary 2-element list, introducing
inefficiency, as well as are, arguably, harder to understand than necessary introducing extra function
calls or variables.

This EEP proposes enhancing comprehensions with the ability to do so using a very natural
syntax extension of the existing comprehension syntax. In particular for list and map
comprehensions:

    [X + 1, X + 2, ... || X <- Xs]

    #{K + 1 => V + 1, K + 2 => V + 2, ... || K := V <- Map}

The semantics of map comprehensions where multiple keys in the same iteration would end up
with the same value, should be the same as if the keys were emitted in subsequent iterations.

Binary comprehensions already support this, and thus there's no enhancement to their syntax
suggested in this EEP, for example:

    << <<(X + 1), (X + 2)>> || <<X>> <= Bin>>.

Parsing & Abstract Forms
==============

Today, the [comprehension abstract forms](https://www.erlang.org/doc/apps/erts/absform.html#expressions) are defined as:

- If `E` is a list comprehension `[E_0 || Q_1, ..., Q_k]`, where each `Q_i` is a
  qualifier, then `Rep(E) = {lc,ANNO,Rep(E_0),[Rep(Q_1), ..., Rep(Q_k)]}`. For
  `Rep(Q)`, see below.
- If `E` is a map comprehension `#{E_0 || Q_1, ..., Q_k}`, where `E_0` is an
  association `K => V` and each `Q_i` is a qualifier, then `Rep(E) =
  {mc,ANNO,Rep(E_0),[Rep(Q_1), ..., Rep(Q_k)]}`. For `Rep(E_0)` and `Rep(Q)`, see
  below.

This EEP proposes to change the representation, in a fairly backwards-compatible way
to include the representation of `E_0` directly, if there's just one element emitted,
or a list of elements, if there's more than one. This slightly complicates the implementation
(vs always emitting a list), but retains backwards-compatibility of the AST for code that
exists today. As such, the definition after the changes would read:

- If `E` is a list comprehension `[E_0, ..., E_k || Q_1, ..., Q_k]`, where each `Q_i` is a
  qualifier, then `Rep(E) = {lc,ANNO,Rep(Es),[Rep(Q_1), ..., Rep(Q_k)]}`. `Rep(Es) = Rep(E_0)`,
  if there's just one expression or `Rep(Es) = [Rep(E_0), ..., Rep(E_k)]` if there's many. For
  `Rep(Q)`, see below.
- If `E` is a map comprehension `#{E_0, ..., E_k || Q_1, ..., Q_k}`, where `E_i` is an
  association `K => V` and each `Q_i` is a qualifier, then `Rep(E) =
  {mc,ANNO,Rep(Es),[Rep(Q_1), ..., Rep(Q_k)]}`. `Rep(Es) = Rep(E_0)`,
  if there's just one expression or `Rep(Es) = [Rep(E_0), ..., Rep(E_k)]` if there's many.
  For `Rep(E_0)` and `Rep(Q)`, see below.

For example the following expressions:

    [X || X <- Xs]
    [X, X || X <- Xs]
    #{K => V || K := V <- Map}
    #{K => V, K => V || K := V <- Map}

Would have the following representations (where `_` is substituted for corresponding `Anno` values):

    {lc,_,{var,_,'X'},[{generate,_,{var,_,'X'},{var,_,'Xs'}}]}
    {lc,_,[{var,_,'X'},{var,_,'X'}],[{generate,_,{var,_,'X'},{var,_,'Xs'}}]}
    {mc,_,{map_field_assoc,_,{var,_,'K'},{var,_,'V'}},[
        {m_generate,_,{map_field_exact,_,{var,_,'K'},{var,_,'V'}},{var,_,'Map'}}}}
    ]}
    {mc,_,[{map_field_assoc,_,{var,_,'K'},{var,_,'V'}},{map_field_assoc,_,{var,_,'K'},{var,_,'V'}}],[
        {m_generate,_,{map_field_exact,_,{var,_,'K'},{var,_,'V'}},{var,_,'Map'}}}}
    ]}

Backwards compatibility
========================

For code that does not use this new feature, nothing changes. For code that uses this new feature
parse transforms or any tools using abstract forms, would need to be updated.

Reference Implementation
========================

[PR #9375](https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/9375)

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal
license, whichever is more permissive.
