    Author: Björn Gustavsson <bjorn(at)erlang(dot)org>
    Status: Final/R12B-0 Proposal is implemented in OTP release R12B-0
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 10-Aug-2007
    Erlang-Version: R12B-0
    Post-History: 
****
EEP 6: New BIFs for tuple and binary sizes
----



Abstract
========

This EEP describes the two new guards BIFs `tuple_size/1`  and `byte_size/1 `
as a prefered alternative to the  `size/1 ` BIF.



Specifications
==============

    byte_size/1::bitstring() -> integer()

Returns the number of bytes needed to store the entire *bitstring*
(see [EEP 4][]). This BIF will return the same value as
`(bit_size(Bin)+7) div 8` (that is, the number of bytes will be
rounded up if number of bits is not evenly divisible by 8).
This BIF is allowed in guards.

    tuple_size/1::tuple() -> integer()

Returns the size of a tuple. This BIF will fail if passed anything
that is not a tuple. This BIF is allowed in guards.



Rationale
=========

The `size/1` BIF accepts either a binary or a tuple, and returns
either the size of binary in bytes or the size of the tuple.

Because `size/1` accepts two different types, it is difficult to
optimize uses of it, both in the compiler and in the run-time system.
Adding the two new BIF will faciliate optimization, and will also
help Dialyzer.

It could be argued that `byte_size/1` should only work for
binaries (bitstrings whose size in bits is disivible by 8) to catch
the bug that the code cannot handle general bitstrings and still does not
use an `is_binary/1` guard test. In my opinion, if the programmer
must round up the result from `bit_size/1` to a whole number of bytes,
he or she is more likely to get *that* wrong: The "obvious" expressions
`bit_size(B) / 8 + 1` or `bit_size(B) div 8 + 1` are both wrong,
and the correct expression `(bit_size(B)+7) div 8` is not immediately
obvious.



Implementation
==============

The implementation is trivial.



Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Code containing local functions named `tuple_size/1` or `byte_size/1`
need to be changed.

The compiler will issue a warning that `size/1` is deprecated
and will be removed in R14B for code that uses `size/1`.



[EEP 4]: <eep-0004.md> "EEP 4"

[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
