    Author: José Valim <jose(dot)valim(at)gmail(dot)com>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 02-Jun-2021
    Post-History:
****
EEP 57: Module attributes for documentation
----

Abstract
========

This EEP proposes a structured documentation API for Erlang where the documentation is handled as part of the language parser and included directly in the compiled .beam files, as a replacement for EDoc. Python, Elixir, and Clojure are examples of languages that follow this approach of treating documentation as data rather than code comments.

Rationale
=========

The main limitation in EDoc today is that the documentation is kept as code comments. This requires an explicit tool to parse said code comments, which complicates access to the docs by IDEs, from the shell, etc. There have been recent improvements in this area by making EDoc compile to EEP 48 but it still requires an explicit step.

Furthermore, the “code comments” approach is more complex implementation wise, as it requires parsing the source code alongside code comments, parsing the code comments, and so on. Personally, I also enjoy the explicit distinction between documentation and code comments: they have different requirements and different audiences.

This EEP proposes the addition of two module attributes to Erlang: `-doc` and `-moduledoc`. This EEP also includes an extra section on additional features that can help writing documentation with those attributes more productive, but that's optional. As with EEP 48, this proposal pertains exclusively to API references and their documentation. It doesn't cover guides, tutorials, and other documentation formats.

New module attributes
=====================

This EEP proposes two new attributes: `-doc` and `-moduledoc`. They could be used as follows:

    -module(base64).
    -moduledoc "
    Convenience functions for encoding and decoding from base64.
    ".

    -doc "
    Encodes the given binary to base64.
    ".
    -spec encode(binary()) -> binary().
    encode(Binary) ->
      % ....

    -doc "
    Decodes the given binary from base64.
    ".
    -spec decode(binary()) -> {ok, binary()} | error.
    encode(Binary) ->
      % ....

The new `-moduledoc` attribute can be listed anywhere and it will contain the documentation for the given module. The `-doc` attribute must be listed once before each function and it will contain the documentation for the following function.

Listing multiple `-doc` attributes for the same function should raise an exception.

## Hidden docs

The module attribute must either be a string OR the atom `hidden`. Marking a module as hidden means it won't be part of the doc. For example, imagine the `base64` module above delegates some of its logic to a private `base64_impl` module:

    -module(base64_impl).
    -moduledoc hidden.

Note a module may be hidden but individual functions can still be documented:

    -module(base64_impl).
    -moduledoc hidden.

    -doc "
    Some comments as if it was public.
    ".
    decode64(Binary) ->
      % ...

According to EEP 48, this is intentional. For example, `base64_impl` should be private for users of the `base64` functionality, but a developer working directly on the `base64` may still want to access the docs for `base64_impl` functions directly from their IDE. Each documentation tool should honor `hidden` accordingly. If no `-doc` is provided, it defaults to `none` according to EEP 48.

The `-doc` attribute accepts the `hidden` atom too.

## Private functions

It is up for debate if private functions should support the `-doc` attribute or not. Elixir warns if this is used, but this has been a source of complaints in the past. My personal take is that Erlang should allow `-doc` for private functions, because the function definition and its visibility is not closely related (i.e. the visibility is dictated by a separate `-export` attribute). In any case, the `-doc` attribute for private functions should never go to the Docs chunk, as per EEP 48.

## Callbacks and types

The `-doc` attribute can also be used to document types and callbacks. Here, we have two options:

  1. Use the `-doc` attribute
  2. Introduce distinct `-callbackdoc` and `-typedoc` attributes

Those approaches are mostly equivalent. The second option is more explicit albeit slightly longer to type.

## Metadata

The new module attributes also support documentation metadata by passing a map as argument:

    -module(beam64).
    -moduledoc "
    Convenience functions for encoding and decoding from base64.
    ".
    -moduledoc #{
      author => [<<"The Erlang/OTP team">>],
      license => <<"Apache 2 License">>,
      cross_references => [binary]
    }.

If the `-moduledoc` is called multiple times with a map, the maps will be merged. This comes with the added benefit that shared metadata can be moved to a header file:

    %% prelude.hrl
    -moduledoc #{
      authors => [<<"The Erlang/OTP team">>],
      license => <<"Apache 2 License">>
    }.

which we can then include and augment:

    -module(beam64).
    -include("prelude.hrl").
    -moduledoc "
    Convenience functions for encoding and decoding from base64.
    ".
    -moduledoc #{cross_references => [binary]}.

A list of built-in attributes is available on EEP 48.

## Compilation

Compiling a module with the `-moduledoc` or `-doc` attributes will automatically generate a Docs chunk into its .beam file, making the documentation directly accessible in the shell. A `-nodocs` flag can be added to `erlc` to skip the generation of the chunk.

Documentation format
====================

One big discussion about documentation is what is the documentation format that the documentation should adopt. Luckily, EEP 48 is agnostic to the format, however one must still be listed. There are a couple options to this problem:

  1. The Erlang/OTP picks a documentation format as the default for the Erlang community, such as AsciiDoc.

  2. The documentation format must be explicitly listed via a new attribute called `-docformat`, such as `-docformat "text/asciidoc".`

This proposal does not attempt to discuss the prefered documentation format, as it is a separate discussion. It is also possible to support both options above (pick a format but allow it to be overridden).

Other topics
============

This section is going to list other topics, and future extensions, that are related to this topic but are not required for the implementation of this EEP.

## Unicode binary strings

In the examples above, we have used char lists for the documentation. However, the Docs chunk requires the documentation to be a binary string. We have a couple of options:

* Support binaries exclusively
* Support lists exclusively with automatic conversion to binaries at some point
* Support both prior formats and automatically convert lists to binaries at some point - preferably in the parser/compiler, to avoid pushing this concern to everyone downstream

Note that similar concerns apply to documentation metadata. Attributes such as License, Authors, and so on, are required to be binaries. Since those attributes are known upfront, they can be validated/normalized by the parser/compiler.

With this in mind, it is important to remember that Erlang binaries are latin1 by default. Therefore, if the documentation contains non-latin1 characters, one would have to write:

    -doc <<"Documentation about púnctuation"/utf8>>.

Similarly, the Authors metadata:

    -doc #{
      authors => [<<"José Valim"/utf8>>]
    }.

For this reason, the Build and Packaging Working Group of the Erlang Ecosystem Foundation has also discussed the option of making Unicode binary strings easier to write in Erlang, such as `u"Héllò World"`. While adding such construct is not a direct part of this EEP, the point made in this subsection is that, if we require the documentation or its metadata to be a binary, we may need to provide conveniences for writing UTF-8 binary strings in Erlang.

## Triple-quoted strings

Another feature often related to structure documentation is triple-quoted strings. To understand why they may be useful, consider the following example that has a double quote in its documentation:

    -doc "Remove double-quotes (\") from the given string".
    remove_double_quotes(String) ->
      ...

For this reason, we may support triple-quoted strings, which reads better in multi-line format and reduces the need for escaping:

    -doc """
    Remove double-quotes (") from the given string
    """.
    remove_double_quotes(String) ->
      ...

Note, however, this is far from a strict requirement. While Python and Elixir provide this feature, Clojure is a counter example of a language with structured documentation but not triple-quoted strings. However, some features, such as doctests detailed below, may strongly rely on triple-quoted strings.

## Doctests

A direct consequence of making the documentation more structured and accessible is that Erlang can include doctests, which is the ability to run and validate the examples in your documentation. For example, someone could write this:

    -doc """
    Encodes the given binary to base64.

        1> base64:encode("hello").
        <<"aGVsbG8=">>

    """.
    -spec encode(binary()) -> binary().
    encode(Binary) ->
      % ....

And then in your test suite:

    doctests(_Config) ->
      ct_doctest:run(base64).

The doctest attribute will access the documentation entries in the base64 Docs chunk, extract all of the examples, and run them. Of course, there is nothing stopping doctests from being implemented on top of EDoc today, but the fact the documentation is already parsed by the parser/compiler, makes doctests trivial to add. Doctests would benefit from a separate EEP, as there are some extra considerations, as doctesting exceptions, unparseable formats, etc, but it is worth mentioning them given their benefits to users and documentation authors.

EDoc and source code documentation
==================================

## Should documentation be in the source code?

There is one discussion which is the debate if API Reference documentation should exist in the source code or be placed in a separate file. There are arguments against and in favor of both approaches. If the documentation is alongside the source code, it is easier to keep it up to date. At the same time, it may pollute the source code. This proposal does not advocate that one is better than the other. Rather, because we already have a tool that colocates documentation and source code, namely EDoc, this EEP aims to propose a more integrated variant of said tool.

## What about EDoc?

If this proposal is to be accepted, what happens with Edoc?

My proposal would be for EDoc to be repurposed with a new backend that translates the existing EDoc documentation to the new module attribute format. Eventually EDoc can be deprecated and phased out.

The HTML rendering part of EDoc can be repurposed to work on the Docs chunk, allowing the Docs chunk to benefit from it. The Build and Packaging Working Group of the Erlang Ecosystem Foundation is also working on getting the ExDoc project ready to generate HTML+EPUB for Erlang projects. The goal is to distribute ExDoc as an escript which will make it really easy to integrate with existing Erlang libraries via a convenient Command Line Interface.

Similarly, if the goal is to eventually phase out EDoc, the Erlang/OTP team needs to discuss what happens with the existing EDoc to XML conversion in `erl_docgen`. Two options exist:

  * Generate EDoc to XML one last time and use the XML as the source from now on

  * Convert EDoc to the documentation style in this proposal and teach erl_docgen how to convert the Docs chunk to XML

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.

[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
[VimVar]: <> " vim: set fileencoding=utf-8 expandtab shiftwidth=4 softtabstop=4: "
