    Author: Björn Gustavsson <bjorn(at)erlang(dot)org>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 14-Sep-2020
    Erlang-Version: 24
    Post-History: 14-Oct-2020, 27-Nov-2020
****
EEP 54: Provide more information about errors
----



Abstract
========

This EEP proposes a mechanism for reporting more human-readable
information about what went wrong when a BIF raises an exception.  The
same mechanism can be used by libraries or applications to provide
more detailed error messages.




Specification
=============

In OTP 23 and earlier, the shell prints a terse message when a call
to a built-in function (BIF) fails:

    1> element(a,b).
    ** exception error: bad argument
         in function  element/2
            called as element(a,b)

The `bad argument` message informs us that one or more of the
arguments to the call were incorrect in some way (in this example,
both arguments have wrong types).

We propose a mechanism that enables the shell to print more helpful
error messages.  Here is how the message would be printed with the
reference implementation of this EEP:

    1> element(a, b).
    ** exception error: bad argument
         in function  element/2
            called as element(a,b)
            *** argument 1: not an integer
            *** argument 2: not a tuple

Note that the exact formatting and phrasing of the messages is an implementation
detail outside the scope of this EEP.  What will be specified here are the APIs
and conventions that make these messages possible.


### Proposals in this EEP

* An extension of the format of the call-stack back trace (**stacktrace**) format
  to indicate that there exists extended error information for that call, and
  a convention for how extended error information can be provided.

* A new `erlang:error/3` BIF to allow libraries and applications to
  raise an exception with extended error information in the stacktrace.

* New functions `erl_error:format_exception/3` and
  `erl_error:format_exception/4` to allow libraries and applications to
  format stacktraces in the same style as the shell.


### Extending the stacktrace

The stack back-trace (**stacktrace**) is currently a list of tuples.
For the purpose of this EEP we are only interested in the first entry
in the stacktrace.  It looks like
`{Module,Function,Arguments,ExtraInfo}`, where `ExtraInfo` is a list
of two-tuples.  As an indication that extended error info is available,
we propose adding an `{error_info,ErrorInfoMap}` tuple to `ExtraInfo`
in the first element in the stacktrace.

The map `ErrorInfoMap` may contain further information about the error
or hints on how to handle the error.

Currently, three optional keys have a defined meaning:

* The value of the key `module` is a module name of a module that
  can be called to provide additional information about the error.
  Default is `Module` from the stacktrace entry.

* The value of the key `function` is the name of the function to
  be called in the module providing the error information. The
  default name is `format_error`.

* The value of the key `cause`, if it exists, provides additional
  information about the error.

To obtain more information about the error, the function named by the
values of the `module` and `function` keys can be called.  Hereafter
in this document, for brevity we will call that function
`format_error/2`.

The arguments for `format_error/2` are the exception reason (usually
`badarg` for BIF calls) and the stacktrace.

Thus, if a call to `element/2` fails with a `badarg` exception and the
first entry in the stacktrace is:

    {erlang,element,[1,no_tuple],[{error_info,ErrorInfoMap}]}

and assuming that the stacktrace is bound to the variable
`StackTrace`, the following call will provide provide additional
information about the error:

    FormatModule = maps:get(module, ErrorInfoMap, erlang),
    FormatFunction = maps:get(function, ErrorInfoMap, format_error),
    FormatModule:FormatError(badarg, StackTrace)

The `format_error/2` function should return a map.  For each argument
that was in error, there should be a map element with the argument number
as the key (that is, `1` for the first argument, `2` for the second, and so on)
and a `unicode:chardata()` term as the value.

The atoms `general` and `reason` can also be returned in the map.
`general` represents a generic error that is not attributed for a specific argument
(for example badarg of io:format("Hello") when the default device is dead).
`reason` will tell the error pretty printer to print the returned string instead
of the error reason. The value pointed to by `general` and `reason` should be
a `unicode:chardata()` term.

As an example:

    Args = [1,no_tuple],
    StackTrace = [{erlang, element, Args, [{error_info,Map}]}],
    erlang:format_error(badarg, StackTrace)

could return:

    #{2 => <<"not a tuple">>}

And:

    Args = [0, b],
    StackTrace = [{erlang, element, Args, [{error_info,Map}]}],
    erlang:format_error(badarg, Entry)

could return:

    #{1 => <<"out of range">>, 2 => <<"not a tuple">>}

And:

    Args = ["Hello"],
    StackTrace = [{io, format, Args, [{error_info,Map}]}],
    erlang:format_error(badarg, Entry)

could return:

    #{general => "the device has terminated"}

Note that the value for the key `cause`, if present, in the
`ErrorInfoMap` term is only to be used by `format_error/2`.  The
actual value for a particular error could change at any time.

The `cause` key will typically only be present when an error occurs
in a BIF that depends on the internal state in the runtime system
(such as `register/2` or the ETS BIFs), or for BIFs with complex
arguments (such as `system_flag/2`) that would make it tedious and
error prone to figure out which argument was in error.

Here is one way that `format_error/2` for the `erlang` module could
be implemented:

    format_error(ExceptionReason, [{erlang, F, As, Info} | _]) ->
        ErrorInfoMap = proplists:get_value(error_info, Info, #{}),
        Cause = maps:get(cause, ErrorInfoMap, none),
        do_format_error(F, As, ExceptionReason, Cause).

    do_format_error(_, _, system_limit, _) ->
        %% The explanation for system_limit is clear enough, so we don't
        %% need any detailed explanations for the arguments.
        #{};
    do_format_error(F, As, _, Cause) ->
        do_format_error(F, As, Cause).

    do_format_error(element, [Index, Tuple], _) ->
        Arg1 = if
                   not is_integer(Index) ->
                       <<"not an integer">>;
                   Index =< 0; Index > tuple_size(Tuple) ->
                       <<"out of range">>;
                   true ->
                       []
               end,
        Arg2 = if
                   not is_tuple(Tuple) -> <<"not a tuple">>;
                   true -> []
               end,
        PotentialErrors = [{1, Arg1}, {2, Arg2}],
        maps:from_list([{ArgNum, Err} ||
                           {ArgNum, Err} <- PotentialErrors,
                           Err =/= []]);

    do_format_error(list_to_atom, _, _) ->
        #{1 => <<"not a flat list of characters">>};

    do_format_error(register, [Name,PidOrPort], Cause) ->
        [Arg1, Arg2] =
        case Cause of
            registered_name ->
                [[],<<"this process or port already has a name">>];
            notalive ->
                [[],<<"the pid does not refer to an existing process">>];
            _ ->
                Errors =
                    [if
                         Name =:= undefined -> <<"'undefined' is not a valid name">>;
                         is_atom(Name) -> [];
                         true -> <<"not an atom">>
                     end,
                     if
                         is_pid(PidOrPort) -> [];
                         is_port(PidOrPort) -> [];
                         true -> <<"not a pid or a port">>
                     end],
                case Errors of
                    [[],[]] ->
                        [<<"name is in use">>];
                    [_,_] ->
                        Errors
                end,
        PotentialErrors = [{1, Arg1}, {2, Arg2}],
        maps:from_list([{ArgNum, Err} ||
                           {ArgNum, Err} <- PotentialErrors,
                           Err =/= []]);
          .
          .
          .

    do_format_error(_, _, _) ->
        #{}.

Note that different strategies for different BIFS are used for
determining the extended error information:

* First the `system_limit` exception is handled (regardless of the
  BIF that was called).  No extended error information is returned,
  because the explanation for `system_limit` is sufficiently clear.

* If `element/2` failed, the `format_error/2` function only examines
  the arguments for `element/2`.

* If `list_to_atom/1` raised a `badarg` exception, there is only one
  possible error reason, so there is no need to examine the arguments.

* If `register/2` BIF fails, the value corresponding to the `cause`
  key provides specific error reasons for two of the possible failure
  reasons.  If the reason is not one of the two, `format_error/2` will
  figure out the other reasons based on the arguments.



### Supplying extended error information using `erlang:error/3`

A library or application can raise an error exception with extended error
information by calling `erlang:error(Reason, Arguments, Options)`.
`Reason` should be the error reason (for example `badarg`), `Arguments`
should be arguments for the calling function, and `Options` should
be `[{error_info,ErrorInfoMap}]`.

The caller of `erlang:error/3` should provide a `format_error/2`
function (not necessarily with that name if the `ErrorInfoMap` has a
`function` key) that behaves as described in the previous section.


### Formatting stacktraces

To make it possible for applications and libraries to format
stacktraces in the same style as the shell, the functions
`erl_error:format_exception/3` and `erl_error:format_exception/4` are
provided.  Here is an example how `erl_error:format_exception/3` can
be used:

    try
        .
        .
        .
    catch
        C:R:Stk ->
            Message = erl_error:format_exception(C, R, Stk),
            io:format(LogFile, "~ts\n", [Message])
    end.

The `erl_error:format_exception/4` function is similar but has a
fourth option argument to support customizing the message.  See the
documentation in the reference implementation for details.


### Possible future extensions

Since the `error_info` tuple in the stacktrace contains a map, more
data could be added to the map in future extension of this EEP.

Similarly, since the return value of `format_error/2` is a map,
additional keys in the map could be assigned a meaning in the future.

For example, the value for the key `hint` could be a longer message
that gives more context or provides concrete advice on how to
investigate or avoid the error.


### Additional examples

Let's look at some examples using ETS:

    1> T = ets:new(table, []).
    #Ref<0.2290824696.4161404930.5168>
    2> ets:update_counter(T, k, 1).
    ** exception error: bad argument
         in function  ets:update_counter/3
            called as ets:update_counter(#Ref<0.2290824696.4161404930.5168>,k,1)
            *** argument 2: not a key that exists in the table

Note that when an error occurs while evaluating an expression entered in the
shell, the evaluator process terminates and any ETS tables created by that
process are deleted.  Thus, calling `update_counter` a second time with the
same arguments results in a different message:

    3> ets:update_counter(T, k, 1).
    ** exception error: bad argument
         in function  ets:update_counter/3
            called as ets:update_counter(#Ref<0.2290824696.4161404930.5168>,k,1)
            *** argument 1: the table identifier does not refer to an existing ETS table

Starting over, creating a new ETS table:

    4> f(T), T = ets:new(table, []).
    #Ref<0.2290824696.4161404930.5205>
    5> ets:insert(T, {k,a,0}).
    true
    6> ets:update_counter(T, k, 1).
    ** exception error: bad argument
         in function  ets:update_counter/3
            called as ets:update_counter(#Ref<0.2290824696.4161404930.5205>,k,1)
            *** argument 3: the value in the given position in the object is not an integer
    7> ets:update_counter(T, k, bad).
    ** exception error: bad argument
         in function  ets:update_counter/3
            called as ets:update_counter(#Ref<0.2290824696.4161404930.5205>,k,bad)
            *** argument 1: the table identifier does not refer to an existing ETS table
            *** argument 3: not a valid update operation




Motivation
==========

When a call to a BIF fails with the reason `badarg` it is not always
obvious even to an experienced developer exactly which argument was
"bad" and in which way.  For a newcomer, having to figure out what a
`badarg` means is another stumbling block standing in the way of
mastering a new language.

Even for an experienced developer, figuring out the reason for a
`badarg` exception for some BIFs is hard or impossible.  For example,
[the documentation for `ets:update_counter/4`][update_counter_4] at the
time of writing lists 8 situations in which `ets:update_counter/4`
will fail. That number is too low.  Missing from list are, for
example, reasons such as the ETS table having been deleted or having
insufficient access right.

The `general` return key was added in order to allow information
to be given about the default I/O device in [io:format("hello")][io_format_1].
It also allows third-party error_report implementations (such as Elixir)
much more freedom in what they can return.

The `reason` return key was added in order for third-party error_report
implementations (such as Elixir) to influence what is printed to describe
the actual error.

[update_counter_4]: http://erlang.org/doc/man/ets.html#update_counter-4
[io_format_1]: http://erlang.org/doc/man/io.html#format-1




Rationale
=========

### Why not change `badarg` to something more informational?

An alternative way to provide more information about errors would be
to introduce additional exception reasons.  For example, the call:

    element(a, b)

could raise the exception:

    {badarg,[{1,not_integer},{2,not_tuple}]}

That change could break code that expects that BIFs should raise a
`badarg` exception.  It is less likely that existing code would match
the fourth entry in the stacktrace.

A related reason is the amount of work needed to revise the error
handling code for all built-in functions.  Implementing building of
Erlang terms in C is tedious and error prone.  There would always be a
risk that bugs in that code would crash the runtime system when an
error occurred.  The test suite would have to be extremely thorough
to ensure that all bugs were found, because error handling code is
typically infrequently executed.


### Why can't the stacktrace contain the complete error reason?

We did consider modifying the implementation of all BIFs so that they
would produce complete error information in the stacktrace when they
failed.  However, as mentioned earlier, building Erlang terms in C is
tedious and error prone.

With the approach we have taken to let Erlang code do most of the
analysis of the error reason, there is a much lower risk that error
handling would crash the application or runtime system.


### Why is the map key named `cause` and not `reason`?

To avoid confusion with the exception reason.


### Why is the value for `cause` in the `ErrorInfoMap` undocumented?

The reason in the `ErrorInfoMap` is not meant to be used for
programmatically figuring out why an error occurred, but only to be used
by `Module:format_error/2` to produce a human-readable message.

Also, for many BIFs the `cause` key will not be present,
as the `Module:format/4` function will produce the messages
based solely on the name of the BIF and its arguments.


### How is the `module` key useful?

* In OTP all `format_error/2` functions will be in modules separate
  from the implementing modules to facilitate reducing the size of OTP
  in systems with tight storage constraints.  Having the `module`
  key avoids the need for having a redirecting `format_error/2`
  function in the implementing module.

* A library or application may want to have a single module that
  implements `format_error/2` for multiple modules.  For example, in
  OTP we might have the module `erl_stdlib_errors` that implements
  `format_error/2` for the modules `binary`, `ets`, `lists`, `maps`,
  `string`, and `unicode`.



### How is the `function` key useful?

* A module could already have a function named `format_error/2`.

* In the future we might want to extend the compiler to generate its
  own `format_error/2` error function to provide more information
  about `badmatch` or `function_clause` errors.



Backwards Compatibility
=======================

All exceptions from BIFs will now have a `ExtraInfo` element (called
`Location` in the documentation for OTP 23) in the call-stack back
trace (stacktrace) that includes an `error_info` tuple.  In previous
releases the `ExtraInfo` element would be an empty list for a failed
BIF call.

Applications that explicitly do matching on the stacktrace and do
assumptions of the layout of the `ExtraInfo` element (for example,
assuming that `Location` is either an empty list or a list of `file`
and `line` tuples in a specific order) may need modifications.  Note
that such assumptions have never been safe and that the [documentation
for error handling][errors] strongly discourages developers to rely on
stacktrace entries for purposes other than debugging.

[errors]: http://erlang.org/doc/reference_manual/errors.html#exceptions




Implementation
==============

The reference implementation includes extended error information for
most BIFs implemented in C in the `erlang` and `ets` modules.
It can be found in [PR #2849][pr].



Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



[pr]: https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/2849



[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
[VimVar]: <> " vim: set fileencoding=utf-8 expandtab shiftwidth=4 softtabstop=4: "
