    Author: Richard A. O'Keefe <ok(at)cs(dot)otago(dot)ac(dot)nz>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Erlang-Version: R12B-4
    Created: 15-Jul-2008
    Post-History:
****
EEP 15: Portable funs
----



Abstract
========

Current Erlang has two kinds of funs.  An "external" fun,
Module:Name/Arity, is just a name and can be used freely.
A "local" fun contains code that is bound to the module it
was defined in.  This means that you cannot save internal
funs in data bases or send them to remote systems and expect them to
work.

I propose a "portable fun", which is a syntactically restricted
kind of fun.  The restriction ensures that a programmer knows
(and the run time can discover) exactly what modules are/will be
required.  These funs can be safely sent to remote nodes, and 
can safely be stored in data bases, retrieved at a later time,
and executed.  Nor need a process holding a reference to such a
fun be killed when the module it came from is unloaded.

A new way of implementing these funs is required for best speed,
so this is quite a large change.  However, a prototype that
interpreted portable functions would be possible.



Specification
=============

Currently, Erlang has

    fun_expr -> 'fun' fun_clauses 'end' : ...

We add

    fun_expr -> 'fun' '!' fun_clauses 'end' : ...

and make the following restrictions:

1.  A portable fun may not contain plain funs.
2.  A portable fun may not contain a call f(...)
    without a module prefix unless f is a built-in function.
3.  A portable fun may not contain any call of the
    form M:f(...) or m:F(...) or M:F(...).
4.  A portable fun may not contain any call of the
    form F(...) unless F is bound in its head.
5.  In a system where abstract patterns are available,
    they are restricted the same way as function calls.

The intent of these restrictions is to ensure that
every call is to a built in function, a known export
of a known module, or to some kind of fun received as
a parameter.

The built-in function erlang:fun_info/1 is extended in
the following ways:

1.  In a {type,Type} item, Type may be 'portable'.
2.  In a {module,Module} item for a portable fun, the Module
    will be present, but there will in fact be no other
    connection between a portable fun and any module by that name.
3.  In a {name,Name} item for a portable fun,
    Name will always be [].
4.  None of the items specified for 'local' funs will be
    returned for 'portable' funs.
5.  {calls,List} will be returned for a portable fun,
    where List is a list of {Module,Imports} pairs, where
    each Module that is used in a remote call in the fun is
    listed once, and the Imports are a list of {Name,Arity}
    pairs as reported in *:module_info/0.  This permits the
    receiver of a portable fun to determine which modules
    need loading and which functions they are expected to export.
6.  For consistency,
    erlang:fun_info(fun M:F/A, calls)
    => [{M,[{F,A}]}]

The built-in function erlang:fun_info/2 is extended similarly.
An additional key 'source' is provided for this function.

###fun_info(Fun, source)###
-   for a local fun, the result is 'undefined'.
-   for an external fun, the result is the abstract syntax
    tree the parser returns for fun M:F/A.
-   for a portable fun, the result is the abstract syntax
    tree the parser returned for the fun!..... end form
    it came from.

The built-in functions-and-guard-predicates
erlang:is_function(Term) and erlang:is_function(Term, Arity)
accept portable funs as well as external and local ones.

Two new built-in functions-and-guard-predicates
erlang:is_portable_function(Term) and
erlang:is_portable_function(Term, Arity)
are provided, which recognise 'portable' and 'external' functions.    
(This proposal will definitely need to be revised to make the
names clearer.)



Motivation
==========

Imagine that you have an Erlang node reporting events to clients
on other nodes.  Clients wish to receive only a few of the events.
One approach is for the reporter to send all events to all clients
and let the clients do the filtering.  A better approach lets the
clients tell the reporter which events they want, and for it to
send just the interesting events.  But how do the clients tell the
reporter which events they are interested in?

One approach is to simply have a fixed set of event classes.
That is too coarse.

Another approach would be to define an event description language,
perhaps based in some way on match specifications.
That is better, but there is currently no way to compile match
specifications (that's another thing this is for!) so matching is
slow, and it is still limited; the reporter might want to provide
summary functions that the filters can use.

Another approach would be to send a fun, which is really the
obvious way to do it.  Unfortunately, this currently will not work,
and there are reasons why it shouldn't.  (For example, the body of
a local function may have been subject to inline expansion of
functions whose definitions on the receiving node are different.)

Another approach would be to send an entire module as a binary.
This gets a bit heavyweight.  It also creates a problem of managing
possibly large numbers of modules in the reporter.  It is also
insecure unless the reporter does a lot of work to verify the code
for safety.  Long term, it will also create version skew problems
if the client and reporter are not using exactly the same BEAM
(or other VM).

For another example, consider storing functions in a data base.
Since a local fun is tied to a specific version of a specific
module, if you save a function one month, upgrade your system,
and restore the module next month, you cannot expect it to work.
This means that, for example, you cannot store a binary together
with a function that knows how to decode it.

For another example, consider something like a data base that
dynamically receive matchspecs (or something like matchspecs)
and wishes to apply such a thing to millions of records.  It
is easy enough to transform a matchspec to Erlang code, and
even to compile the result, but now you have a module to manage,
not a simple thing that can be cleaned up by a garbage collector.

Basically, the aim of this proposal is to move Erlang one step
further along the "functions are data" functional programming way.

However, it is necessary to do this in such a way that a process
receiving a portable fun does not have to place total trust in
the source.  The receiver must be able to inspect a portable fun
as well as just call it.



Rationale
=========

It would not be a good idea to just add the portability
restrictions on top of existing fun syntax.  That would break
most programs that use funs.

Perhaps the obvious thing would be to use #fun...end, as the
sharp seems to be Erlang's "oops, we didn't think of that in the
Good Old Days" marker, much as it is in Common Lisp.  However, we
want that notation for anonymous abstract patterns, and in any
case, there is nothing iconic about the sharp in this context.

The bang is used to suggest that this is a kind of fun that you
might want to send, which indeed it is.  As for where it is
placed, the bang is to be thought of as post-modifying the 'fun'
keyword, not as pre-modifying the argument list, so that

    fun!({a,X}) -> ...
       ;({b,Y}) -> ...
    end

does not have a repeated bang.

What do you send when you send a portable fun?

-   the environment, of course
-   some sort of header, of course
-   but what does the CODE look like?

If it is native code, you can't send a fun from a SPARC to a Mac.
If it is BEAM code, you can't send a fun to another system unless
it has exactly the same version of BEAM.
In either case, you have made life extremely hard for a wary
receiver that wants to inspect the code.
If it is the source code, then

+   it can be (lazily!) compiled to BEAM (or some other VM) 
+   it can be interpreted
+   it can be debugged
+   it can be inspected
+   we don't have to worry about how the compiler deals with
    comprehensions -- sadly, the current compiler generates
    recursive auxiliary functions, which complicates things,
    and better approaches are possible

Accordingly, the binary format for a portable fun would include
the source tree, possibly compressed as in Kistler's Juice.
The native representation would include a pointer to a block of
BEAM code and optionally a pointer to a block of native code,
but these would be filled in on first call.

The possibility of interpretation means that there is a cheap way
to implement a prototype of this EEP: always interpret.  This too
argues against any change to existing funs; we don't want to slow
them down.



Backwards Compatibility
=======================

"fun!" is currently a syntax error,
so no existing code can be affected by that.

As I read the documentation for erlang:fun_info/[1,2],
programmers should always have treated these functions as
open-ended.  Nothing promised by the existing manual is
removed or altered, only new values provided.

Any existing program that called
erlang:is_portable_function/[1,2]
didn't work anyway, there being no such functions.
If a module defined is_portable_function/1 or /2,
it would not have been allowed in a guard, but would have
been allowed elsewhere; such a module could be affected.
If the compiler discovers a definition of either function
in a module, it should print a warning message, and use only
the module's version.



Reference Implementation
========================

None.

Long term, this needs at least two things:

1.  a fun representation that holds instructions in a binary
    that is not part of any module, not unlike the classic
    Interlisp-D implementation, so that such funs can be
    individually garbage collected.  This is desirable anyway.

2.  a compilation strategy for comprehensions that, like the
    classic Pop-2 system, generates in-line loops instead of
    calls to out-of-line auxiliary functions.  This is
    desirable anyway; it should be noticeably faster.



Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
