    Author: Björn Gustavsson <bjorn(at)erlang(dot)org>
    Status: Accepted/19.0-we Proposal's -warning and -error directives are accepted to be implemented in OTP release 19.0
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 30-Sep-2015
    Erlang-Version: R19
    Post-History: 16-Oct-2015, 22-Oct-2015, 29-Oct-2015
****
EEP 44: Additional preprocessor directives
----



Abstract
========

This EEP proposes extensions to the preprocessor to allow more
powerful conditional compilation.  The existing `-ifdef` directive
provides the bare minimum functionality for doing conditional
compilation, but it will often require help from external tools such
as `autoconf`.



Specification
=============

We will introduce a new predefined macro and four new preprocessor
directives.


The OTP_RELEASE macro
---------------------

There will be a new predefined macro called `OTP_RELEASE`.  Its value
will be an integer giving the release number for run-time system that
is running the compiler.  In OTP 19, its value will be `19`.

Code that must work both in both OTP 18 and OTP 19 can use the
following construction:

    -ifdef(OTP_RELEASE).
      %% Code that will work in OTP 19 or higher.
    -else.
      %% Code that will work in OTP 18.
    -endif.

From `OTP_RELEASE`, information about the *minimum* capabilities of
the run-time system can be inferred.  It is especially useful for
testing for the presence of major new features, especially language
features.

As a hypothetical example, assuming that OTP_RELEASE had been
available in OTP 17, if `?OTP_RELEASE == 17` evaluated to `true`,
we would know that maps were supported.



The -if And -elif Directives
----------------------------

The syntax for the new directives is as follows:

    -if(Expression).
       .
       .
       .
    -elif(Expression).
       .
       .
       .
    -else.
       .
       .
       .
    -endif.

The `-elif` directive may be repeated any number of times.

*Expression* is similar to the kind of expressions that are
allowed in guards, with a few differences:

- Only a single expression is allowed. `,` and ';' may not be
used. Use `andalso` or `orelse` instead.

- In addition to the guard BIFs that are allowed in guards, there are
several additional functions allowed in the expression for an `-if` or
`-elif`. Those functions are described in the next section.

- Calls to unknown functions will not cause a compilation error,
but an evalution failure which will cause the lines that follows
the `-if` or `-elif` to be skipped.  See the Examples section for
an example to see why that is useful.  Calls to BIFs that are not
guard BIFs (such as `integer_to_list/1`) will cause a compilation
error.



Built-In Functions in -if/-elif
-------------------------------

The following functions are available in `-if` and `-elif` expressions
(and *only* there):

* `defined(`*Symbol*`)`
* `is_deprecated(`*Module*`,` *Function*`,` *Arity*`)`
* `is_exported(`*Module*`,` *Function*`,` *Arity*`)`
* `is_header(`*Header*`)`
* `is_module(`*Module*`)`
* `version(`*App*`)`

Descriptions of each `if`-builtin follow.


### defined/1

`defined(`*Symbol*`)` tests whether the preprocessor symbol is
defined, just like `-ifdef(Symbol)`.


### is_deprecated/3

`is_deprecated(`*Module*`,` *Function*`,` *Arity*`)` tests whether
*Function*`/`*Arity* is deprecated.  It returns `true` if and only
if the compiler would generate a deprecated warning for the function.

To clarify, there are two ways that a function can be deprecated.

- One is by using the `-deprecated()` attribute.  This is what you use
to deprecate your functions, and the Xref tool knows about it.  The
compiler does not, and `is_deprecated/3` does not either.

- The other way is by listing the function in the compiler's table of
deprecated functions in the `otp_internal` module.  This is what
`is_deprecated/3` consults.  `is_deprecated(M, F, A)` is true if and
only if `M:F/A` is listed in that table; the `nowarn_deprecated`
option has no effect on this decision.


### is_exported/3

`is_exported(`*Module*`,` *Function*`,` *Arity*`)` tests whether
*Function*`/`*Arity* is exported from *Module*.

*Module* must already have been compiled.  `is_exported/3` will first
call `code:ensure_loaded/1` to load *Module* if it is not already
loaded.  If *Module* is not loaded and `code:ensure_loaded/1` fails to
load it, `is_exported/3` will return `false`.  When *Module* is known
to be loaded, `is_exported/3` will test whether the
*Function*`/`*Arity* is exported from *Module*.


### is_header/1

`is_header(`*Header*`)` tests whether the header file *Header*
exists.  It searches for header files in the same way as
`-include_lib`.


### is_module/1

`is_module(`*Module*`)` tests whether the module *Module* exists.

*Module* must already have been compiled.  `is_module/1` will call
`code:ensure_loaded/1` to load *Module* if it is not already loaded.
If and only if `code:ensure_loaded/1` returns `{module,`*Module*`}`,
`is_module/1` will return `true`.


### version/1

`version(`*App*`)` returns the version number for the given
application *App* as a list of integers and strings.

First the version number string will be split at each "." to
produce a list of strings.  Then an attempt will be made to convert
each string in the list to an integer using `list_to_integer/1`.
If the conversion fails, the string will be kept.

Here is an example:

    "1.10.7"

First the string will be split:

    ["1","10","7"]

Then each string in the list will be converted to an integer:

    [1,10,7]

Here is another example:

    "1.6.0c"

First the string will be split:

    ["1","6","0c"]

Then `version/1` will attempt to convert each string to an integer:

    [1,6,"0c"]

The last string is not numeric, so it is kept.

The version string is fetched from the app file for the application.
If the application cannot be found in the code path, or if the app
file cannot be read, or if there is no `vsn` record in the file, the
return value will be `[]`.



The -error Directive
--------------------

The syntax for the `-error` directive is:

    -error(Term).

The directive will cause a compilation error. The error message
will look like:

    file.erl:Line: -error(Term).

Here is an example:

    -module(example).
    -error("This is wrong").
    -error(wrong).
    -error("Macros will be expanded: " ?MODULE_STRING).

The error message will be:

    example.erl:2: -error("This is wrong").
    example.erl:3: -error(wrong).
    example.erl:4: -error("Macros will be expanded: example").

The -warning Directive
--------------------

The syntax for the `-warning` directive is:

    -warning(Term).

The directive will generate a warning, but the compilation will
continue.  The warning message will look like:

    file.erl:Line: Warning -warning(Term).

Here is an example:

    -module(example).
    -warning("This module is obsolete").
    -warning("Macros will be expanded: " ?MODULE_STRING).

The warning message will be:

    example.erl:2: Warning: -warning("This module is obsolete").
    example.erl:3: Warning: -warning("Macros will be expanded: example").


Examples
--------

Here is an example of code that will work in OTP 18 through OTP 20.
There will be a compilation error if an attempt is made to compile
the code in OTP 21 or higher.

    -ifndef(OTP_RELEASE).
      %% Code that will work in OTP 18.
    -else.
      %% OTP 19 or higher.
      -if(?OTP_RELEASE =:= 19).
        %% Code that will work in OTP 19.
      -elif(?OTP_RELEASE =:= 20).
        %% Code that will work in OTP 20.
      -else.
        -error("Unsupported OTP release").
      -endif.
    -endif.

(Note that current versions of the preprocessor has partial support
for `-if` in that it can *skip* an `-if` ... `-endif` construction.
Therefore this code example will work in OTP 18.)

Here is an hypothetical example showing how a problem could have
been solved in the past
(see [predefined Erlang version macros] [ssh_behaviour]).

    -if(is_module(ssh_daemon_channel)).
      %% R16B: use new ssh behaviour
      -behavior(ssh_daemon_channel).
    -else.
      %% R15: use old ssh behaviour
      -behaviour(ssh_channel).
    -endif.

Here is an example of dealing with a newly introduced header file.

    -if(is_header("stdlib/include/assert.hrl")).
      -include_lib("stdlib/include/assert.hrl").
    -else.
      %% Define dummy macros just so that our code will compile.
      -define(assert(E),ok).
      -define(assertNot(E),ok).
    -endif.

Here is an hypothetical example showing how we could have tested
for the presence of maps:

    -if(not is_map(a)).
      %% The guard BIF is_map/1 exists, i.e. maps are supported.
    -else.
      %% No support for maps in this release.
    -endif.

Note that `not is_map(a)` will evaluate to `true` if the `is_map/1` is
a supported guard BIF.  If `is_map/1` is not a supported guard BIF,
the call to `is_map/1` will generate an exception which will fail the
expression.

Here is an example involving the hypothetical `foobar` application.
Since it is not included in OTP, it might not have been compiled, and
`is_exported/3` could return `false` for the wrong reason.  To guard
against that, we will abort the compilation if the `foobar` module
does not exist:

    -if(not is_module(foobar)).
    -error("The foobar application has not been compiled").
    -endif.

    -if(is_exported(foobar, new_feature, 1)).
    %% Do something smart with the new feature.
    -else.
    %% Do as best as we can without the new feature.
    -endif.




Motivation
==========

It is common practice for many open-source applications (or libraries)
to work with at least two major releases of OTP: the current release
and the previous one.  An application may also have dependencies to
other third-party libraries and may need to work with different
versions of those.

Some applications may support several releases by refraining from
using features that are not available in both releases.  That may not
always be possible, depending on the purpose of the application. A
tool for pretty printing Erlang terms, for example, would not be very
useful if it didn't support all data types in the release in which it
was running.

There is also another issue.  Modern applications are expected:

- To compile without any warnings.  Many developers use `-Werror` to
turn warnings into compilation errors.  That means that warnings
for deprecated functions must be suppressed or eliminated.  As an
example, the `now/0` BIF was marked as deprecated in OTP 18.
The recommended replacement BIFs were introduced in the same release.

- Not to cause any warnings in Dialyzer, and to have good type
specifications for all exported functions to help finding errors.
The type specifications must compile in all supported releases,
and must not cause warnings.

In many cases, the most practical solution for supporting several
OTP releases is conditional compilation, that is, if some condition
if fulfilled, one part of a source file will be compiled, and another
part if not.  For example, to handle the deprecation of `now/0`:

    -ifdef(NOW_DEPRECATED).
      %% Use the recommended replacement functions.
      sys_time() ->
        erlang:timestamp().
      uniq_name() ->
        Uniq = erlang:unique_integer([positive]),
        lists:flatten(io_lib:format("name_~w", [Uniq]));
    -else.
      %% Use now/0.
      sys_time() ->
        now().
      uniq_name() ->
        {A,B,C} = now(),
        lists:flatten(io_lib:format("name_~w_~w_~w", [A,B,C])).
    -endif.

That approach works, but some external tool (for example `autoconf`)
will have to arrange for `-DNOW_DEPRECATED` to be added to the command
line for `erlc` if `now/0` has been deprecated.

Our suggestion for extending the preprocessor facilitates using
conditional compilation without any external tools. Assuming that
the extended preprocessor had been available earlier, the previous
example can be rewritten to:

    -if(is_exported(erlang, timestamp, 0)).
      %% Use the recommended replacement functions.
      sys_time() ->
        erlang:timestamp().
      uniq_name() ->
        Uniq = erlang:unique_integer([positive]),
        lists:flatten(io:lib_format("name_~w", [Uniq])).
    -else.
      %% Use now/0.
      sys_time() ->
        now().
      uniq_name() ->
        {A,B,C} = now(),
        lists:flatten(io:lib_format("name_~w_~w_~w", [A,B,C])).
    -endif.

Alternatively, the first `-if` could have been written:

    -if(is_deprecated(erlang, now, 0)).



Rationale
=========

Preprocessors have a bad reputation, so why extend the preprocessor?

A quick [Google search for "preprocessor evil"][preprocessor_evil]
seems to indicate that it is the macro expansion in the preprocessor
that is considered evil, not the conditional compilation part.

That said, the major pitfall of conditional compilation is that the
code may be misbehave if it is run in a different environment than it
was compiled in.  This potential problem already exists with the
`-ifdef` directive in the current preprocessor.  It is the
responsibility of the user of conditional compilation to ensure that
the code is run in an environment compatible with the compilation
environment.

There is one thing a preprocessor, and only a preprocessor, can do:
skip code that is not syntactically correct (for example, code that
uses the map syntax).  Therefore, it seems that there is no way
getting around using a preprocessor.  We *could* invent a new
preprocessor, but that is not the purpose of this EEP.

What about feature detection instead of testing version numbers?

We are all for that.  Whenever possible, tests against version numbers
should be avoided if there is a better way.  For example, to test
whether the new behavior `ssh_daemon_channel` exists, use
`is_module(ssh_daemon_channel)`.

Would it not be better to have a built-in `supported` function to test
for language-related features instead of testing for the OTP release
number?

    -if(supported(maps)).
    %% Map code.
    -endif.

Perhaps.  It seems that for this to work the list of supported feature
names accepted by `supported` must be carefully maintained and
documented for each release.  The users must then look up the
appropriate feature name to use.  It may also not be obvious how to
name minor changes to the type specification syntax or to the language
itself.  The resulting code may not be any easier to understand than a
test against a release number.


### Rationale for allowing unknown functions in expressions

The rules for expressions says that the following example is legal
because `foobar/0` is an unknown function:

    -if(foobar()).
    %% Always skipped.
    -endif.

The reason is that otherwise some expressions would be legal in
some releases but not others.  For example, `-if(is_map(a))` would
be legal in OTP releases that support maps, but cause a compilation
error in other releases.  Also, as a side effect, testing guard
BIFs can be used to test for new features instead of testing
`OTP_RELEASE`.



Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Modules that define the `OTP_RELEASE` macro will fail to compile
with a message similar to this:

    example.erl:4: redefining predefined macro 'OTP_RELEASE'

Similarly, attempting to define `OTP_RELEASE` from the command
line using `-D` will also fail.

Modules that has attributes that looks like `-error(Term)` or
`-warning(Term)` will need to be updated, as `-error(Term)` will
now cause a compilation error and `-warning(Term)` will cause
a compilation warning.

The function `epp:parse_erl_form/1` can now return `{warning,Info}` in
addition to its previous return values.  Applications that call
`epp:parse_erl_form/1` will need to be updated to handle the new
return value.  Similarly, the `epp:parse_file()` family of functions
can now include `{warning,Info}` tuples in the returned list of forms.



Implementation
==============

The reference implementation can be fetched from Github like this:

    git fetch git://github.com/bjorng/otp.git bjorn/preprocessor-extensions




[ssh_behaviour]: http://erlang.org/pipermail/erlang-questions/2013-July/074542.html "predefined Erlang version macros"

[preprocessor_evil]: https://www.google.com/?gfe_rd=cr&q=preprocessor+evil&gws_rd=cr#safe=off&q=preprocessor+evil "preprocessor evil"

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
[VimVar]: <> " vim: set fileencoding=utf-8 expandtab shiftwidth=4 softtabstop=4: "
