    Author: Björn Gustavsson <bjorn(at)erlang(dot)org>
    Status: Accepted/19.0 Proposal is to be implemented in OTP release 19.0
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 27-Oct-2015
    Erlang-Version: R19
    Post-History: 29-Oct-2015, 09-Nov-2015, 11-Nov-2015, 16-Nov-2015
****
EEP 45: New macros for function name and arity
----



Abstract
========

This EEP proposes two new macros called `FUNCTION_NAME` and
`FUNCTION_ARITY` that will return the name and arity, respectively, of
the current function.



Specification
=============

The new predefined macro `FUNCTION_NAME` expands to the name of the
current function (as an atom).  The new predefined macro
`FUNCTION_ARITY` expands to arity of the current function (as an
integer).  Example:

    a_function(_, _) ->
      {?FUNCTION_NAME,?FUNCTION_ARITY}.

After preprocessing, the example will look like:

    a_function(_, _) ->
      {a_function,2}.

The preprocessor will expand all other macros before expanding
the `FUNCTION_NAME` and `FUNCTION_ARITY` macros. So if we have
this example:

    -define(F, a_function).
    ?F(_, _) ->
      {?FUNCTION_NAME,?FUNCTION_ARITY}.

the preprocessor will first expand it to:

    a_function(_, _) ->
      {?FUNCTION_NAME,?FUNCTION_ARITY}.

and then to:

    a_function(_, _) ->
      {a_function,2}.

The `FUNCTION_NAME` and `FUNCTION_ARITY` macros can be used in any
form that starts with an atom followed by a left parenthesis (when
all other macros have been expanded).  The macros may be used even in
a function head.  Thus, the following example is legal (albeit not
very useful):

    a(?FUNCTION_NAME) -> ok.

It will be expanded to:

    a(a) -> ok.

The `FUNCTION_NAME` and `FUNCTION_ARITY` macros will also work in the
presence of other macros in the function head.  Example:

    -define(__, _, _).
    b(?FUNCTION_NAME, ?FUNCTION_ARITY, ?__) ->
       ok.

This code will first be expanded to:

    b(?FUNCTION_NAME, ?FUNCTION_ARITY, _, _) ->
       ok.

and then to:

    b(b, 4, _, _) ->
      ok.

Using `FUNCTION_NAME` or `FUNCTION_ARITY` in an attribute will cause a
compilation error.  Example:

    -attr(?FUNCTION_NAME).

The error message will look like this:

    example.erl:4: ?FUNCTION_NAME can only be used within a function

An invocation of `FUNCTION_NAME` or `FUNCTION_ARITY` must not begin a
form.  Therefore, the following example is illegal:

    ?FUNCTION_NAME() -> ok.

The error message will look like this:

    example.erl:4: ?FUNCTION_NAME must not begin a form




Implementation Requirements
---------------------------

This EEP does not specify exactly how the `FUNCTION_NAME` and
`FUNCTION_ARITY` macros should be implemented, but it does impose some
requirements on the implementation:

* The implementation must be efficient.  In particular, there should
  not be any noticeable slowdowns for modules that don't use the
  `FUNCTION_NAME` or `FUNCTION_ARITY` macros.

* The expansion of `FUNCTION_NAME` and `FUNCTION_ARITY` must be done
  by the `epp` module.  Postponing expansion of the macros to a later
  compiler pass is not acceptable, as it could cause compatibility
  issues with parse transforms and other tools that operate on the
  abstract format.




Examples
--------

    -define(FUNCTION_STRING, atom_to_list(?FUNCTION_NAME) ++ "/" ++
              integer_to_list(?FUNCTION_ARITY)).

    test() ->
      ?FUNCTION_STRING.

The `test/0` function will return `"test/0"`.  Note that the
BEAM compiler will evaluate constant expressions at compilation time;
thus, `FUNCTION_STRING` will be turned into a string literal
during compilation.

    c() ->
      F = fun() -> ?FUNCTION_NAME end,
      F().

The `c/0` function will return `c`.

The macros can be used when creating a fun that refers to the
containing function:

    self_ref(Data, Handler) ->
        ...
        Handler(Data, fun ?FUNCTION_NAME/?FUNCTION_ARITY)
        ...



Motivation
==========

Many users have asked for some sort of macro that could return the
name of the current function, similar to `FILE`, `LINE`, and `MODULE`.
For example: [Why no ?FUNCTION macro] [why].

The most common use case for a function name macro seems to be for
logging information to a log file.  Possible workarounds include using
a parse transform, using `process_info/2`, or generating and catching
an exception.  Unless the application needs a parse transform for some
other reason, implementing a parse transform just to catch the name of
the current function is cumbersome.  The other workarounds have
run-time penalties.




Rationale
=========

Why not only a single `FUNCTION` macro?
---------------------------------------

In order to minimize the pollution of the namespace of preprocessor
symbols, should there not be only a single `FUNCTION` macro that would
return a tuple with the name and arity of the current function?

It would certainly be possible, but many common use cases would be
somewhat cumbersome:

    io:format("~p/~p: ~s\n", [element(1, ?FUNCTION),
                              element(2, ?FUNCTION),
                              Message])

Compare that to the more readable:

    io:format("~p/~p: ~s\n", [?FUNCTION_NAME,
                              ?FUNCTION_ARITY,
                              Message])

There are also contexts where `element(1, ?FUNCTION)` or `element(2,
?FUNCTION)` would be illegal, for example in function heads or after
the `fun` keyword.  The following example would fail to compile:

    fun element(1, ?FUNCTION)/element(2, ?FUNCTION)




Why do I have to define `FUNCTION_STRING` myself?
-------------------------------------------------

The most important reason is that there are *two* reasonable
definitions:

    -define(FUNCTION_STRING,
       atom_to_list(?FUNCTION_NAME) ++ "/" ++
       integer_to_list(?FUNCTION_ARITY)).

and

    -define(FUNCTION_STRING,
       ?MODULE_STRING ++ ":" ++
       atom_to_list(?FUNCTION_NAME) ++ "/" ++
       integer_to_list(?FUNCTION_ARITY)).

There is no run-time penality for defining `FUNCTION_STRING`
yourself, as the compiler will turn either definition of
`FUNCTION_STRING` into a literal string during compilation.

Another reason is to avoid polluting the macro namespace with
more predefined macros than strictly needed.

Historical note: `MODULE_STRING` was added as an optimization in OTP
R7B, because at the time the compiler did not optimize constant
expressions as well as it does now.




Why are `FUNCTION_NAME` and `FUNCTION_ARITY` allowed in function heads?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

I cannot see any practical use for the `FUNCTION_NAME` and
`FUNCTION_ARITY` macro in a function head.  Only allowing them to be
used in function bodies would make sense.  But consider this example:

    f(a, _) ->
      ok;
    f(?FUNCTION_NAME, ?FUNCTION_ARITY) ->
      ok.

To be able to reject invocations of `FUNCTION_NAME` and
`FUNCTION_ARITY` in clauses other than the first, the preprocessor
must basically be able to parse arbitrary Erlang code.  The only
practical solution would be to use the existing parser in the
`erl_parse` module.  That would slow down the preprocessor without
providing any additional benefit.




Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Modules that define either `FUNCTION_NAME` or `FUNCTION_ARITY` will
fail to compile with a message similar to this:

    example.erl:4: redefining predefined macro 'FUNCTION_NAME'

Similarly, attempting to define `FUNCTION_NAME` or `FUNCTION_ARITY`
from the command line using `-D` will also fail.



Implementation
==============

The reference implementation has essentially zero extra cost for
functions that do not use the `FUNCTION_NAME` or `FUNCTION_ARITY`
macros.  The preprocessor will only start scanning to determine the
name and arity of the current function when an invocation of either
`FUNCTION_NAME` or `FUNCTION_ARITY` has been seen.  The scanning will
stop as soon as the right parenthesis at the end of the argument list
is found.  The name and arity will be saved and reused if another of
invocation of `FUNCTION_NAME` or `FUNCTION_ARITY` is seen in the same
function definition.

The reference implementation can be fetched from Github like this:

    git fetch git://github.com/bjorng/otp.git bjorn/function-macro



[why]: http://erlang.org/pipermail/erlang-questions/2007-September/029387.html "Why no ?FUNCTION macro"

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
[VimVar]: <> " vim: set fileencoding=utf-8 expandtab shiftwidth=4 softtabstop=4: "
