    Author: Alceste Scalas <alceste(at)crs4(dot)it>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 3-Sep-2007
    Erlang-Version: R12B
    Post-History:
****
EEP 7: Foreign Function Interface (FFI)
----



Abstract
========

This EEP describes a Foreign Function Interface (FFI) for Erlang/OTP,
that allows to easily perform direct calls of external C functions.
It introduces three new BIFs (`ffi:raw_call/3`,
`erl_ddll:load_library/3` and `ffi:raw_call/2`) that accomplish the main
FFI tasks: loading generic C libraries, making external function calls
and performing automatic Erlang-to-C and C-to-Erlang type conversions.

It also introduces two auxiliary BIFs for converting C buffers/strings
into binaries (`ffi:raw_buffer_to_binary/2` and
`ffi:raw_cstring_to_binary/1`), a new `ffi` Erlang module that
provides a higher-level API with stricter type checking, and some
utility macros.  Finally, it extends `erl_ddll:info/2` with FFI
information.



Motivation
==========

The current Erlang extension mechanisms can be divided in two main
categories:

1. absolute stability at the price of speed (C nodes, pipe drivers);

2. more speed at the (potential) price of stability (linked-in
   drivers).

Linked-in drivers have thus become the standard way for creating
library bindings when efficiency is an issue.  In both cases, however,
the Erlang driver interface implies the development of relevant
amounts of glue code, mostly because the communication between Erlang
and C always requires data parsing and (de)serialization.  Several
tools have been created in order to autogenerate (at least part of)
that glue: from the (now unmaintained) [IG driver generation tool][1]
to the newer [Erlang Driver Toolkit (EDTK)][2] and [Dryverl][3].

But, even with the help of these tools, developing an Erlang driver is
a difficult and time-consuming task (especially when interfacing
external libraries with tens or hundreds of functions), and the glue
code itself increases the possibility to introduce bugs --- that, in
the case of linked-in drivers, usually mean VM crashes.  For all these
reasons, the lack of libraries and the difficulty of interfacing them
from other languages is one of the negative aspects that are usually
associated with Erlang.

The same problems also arise when a developer needs to replace
performance-critical portions of his/her Erlang code with optimized C
functions.  In this case, also the data serialization/deserialization
overhead may be a significant issue.

An easier method for interfacing Erlang and C code could drastically
extend the Erlang capabilities and open new usage scenarios.



Rationale
=========

This EEP proposes a Foreign Function Interface (FFI) extension that
would allow to easily perform direct C function calls.  This concept
is implemented in almost every language, with two main (non-exclusive)
approaches:

1. automatic type conversions between the host and the foreign
   language (examples: [Python][7], [Haskell][8]);

2. documented C interface for handling host language types from the
   foreign language (examples: [Java][9], [Python][10] [(API)][11]).

This EEP follows the first approach, but (when possible) also reuses
part of the existing C Driver API (and, thus, allows to manage
``ErlDrvBinary`` and ``ErlIOVec`` pointers in the external C
functions).

The FFI has been designed *not* to require language changes or
introduce incompatibilities.

The BIFs and functions proposed in this EEP don't give any access to
the Erlang VM internals --- but the called C functions could leak
memory and/or cause the Erlang VM to crash.  The FFI is, thus, not
intended for "casual" Erlang developers: this is a tool designed for
library bindings developers (that should take care of hiding FFI calls
from final users), and advanced programmers looking for an easy (and
efficient) way to call C code from Erlang.



Overview
========

In order to call a C function, the FFI needs a port opened towards the
required C code.  Thus, with the current driver loading mechanism, a
developer would be required to:

1. create a C file with a void ``ErlDrvEntry`` structure and driver
   init function;

2. compile it and possibly link it against the required C libraries,
   thus obtaining a void Erlang driver;

3. load the driver in the Erlang VM, by using `erl_ddll:load/2`.

In order to simplify this procedure, this EEP proposes the
`erl_ddll:load_library/3` function, that allows to load a generic
library in the Erlang VM --- even if it lacks the structure of an
Erlang linked-in driver.

`erl_ddll:load_library/3` also offers an option to preload a list of C
function symbols and signatures, thus precompiling the internal
structures needed for performing dynamic function calls.  Information
about preloaded data can be retrieved with `erl_ddll:info/2`.

Once a library or driver has been loaded, `erlang:open_port/2` or
`erlang:open_port/1` could be used to get a port for the FFI
functions, and perform calls either through the low-level or the
high-level APIs.


Low-level API
-------------

The low-level FFI methods are denoted by the `raw_` prefix.  The
main function is the `ffi:raw_call/3` BIF, that performs a direct C
function call through an open port.  It converts C types to/from
Erlang types.

When taken alone, `ffi:raw_call/3` has got a major drawback: it introduces
great call overhead, due to the C symbol lookup and the dynamic
construction of the function call.

In order to exploit preloading option of `erl_ddll:load_library/3`, the
`ffi:raw_call/2` BIF is introduced: it avoids symbol lookup and call
structure compilation, thus guaranteeing a lower call overhead than
`ffi:raw_call/3`.

Furthermore, the low-level interface provides two BIFs for creating an
Erlang binary from a C pointer (possibly returned by a FFI call).
These BIFs are `ffi:raw_buffer_to_binary/2` and
`ffi:raw_cstring_to_binary/1`.


High-level API
--------------

The high-level interface is built upon the low-level one.  It
introduces the concept of type-tagged values: any value passed to or
returned from FFI calls has the form of a `{Type, Value}` tuple.  This
allows to:

1. increase the readability of FFI calls;

2. make the C calls safer: the consistency of tagged values is checked
   before the values themselves are passed to the low-level API.
   Furthermore, the preload information given to
   `erl_ddll:load_library/3` is used (when available) to ensure that the
   tagged values actually match the function signature;

3. simulate the static typing of C code, thus requiring proper and
   explicit "casts" when a tagged value needs to be converted to
   another type.

These checks are performed by `ffi:call/3`, `ffi:buffer_to_binary/2`
and `ffi:cstring_to_binary/1` (the type-tagged equivalents of the
low-level BIFs).  Type-tagged values can also be checked with
`ffi:check/1`.  Furthermore, the allowed minimum and maximum value of
each FFI type can be examined with `ffi:min/1` and `ffi:max/1`.


Utility macros
--------------

The FFI defines a series of utility macros in the `ffi_hardcodes.hrl`
header file, that could be used for binary matching of C buffers and
structures.


Specifications
==============

Types
-----

### `c_func_name()`

    c_func_name() = atom() | string()

Name of a C function.


### `type_tag()`

    type_tag() = atom()

Valid FFI type atom.  For the list of allowed values, see the
Appendix.


### `tagged_value()`

    tagged_value() = tuple(type_tag(), term())

Type-tagged value used for FFI calls.


### `tagged_func_name()`

    tagged_func_name() = tuple(type_tag(), c_func_name())

C function name with return type.


### `func_index()`

    func_index() = integer()

Function position on the list of preloads given to
`erl_ddll:load_library/3`.


### `tagged_func_index()`

    tagged_func_index() = tuple(type_tag(), func_index())

C function index with return type.


### `signature()`

    signature() = tuple(type_tag(), ...)

Signature of a C function: return type followed by arguments types (if
any).


`erl_ddll:load_library/3`
-------------------------

    erl_ddll:load_library(Path, Name,
                          OptionsList) -> ok | {error, ErrorDesc}

Types:

-   `Path = Name = string() | atom()`

-   `OptionList = [Option]`

-   `Option = tuple(preload, [Preload])`

-   `Preload = tuple(c_func_name(), signature())`

Load a generic shared library.

If an `ErlDrvEntry` structure and a driver init function are found when
loading the library, this BIF will behave like `erl_ddll:load/2`.  The
function parameters are also the same of `erl_ddll:load/2`, with the
following addition:

**OptionList** is a list of options for library/driver loading.
The supported options are:

-   **`{preload, PreloadList}`**
    Preload the given list of functions, and prepare their
    call structures.  Each PreloadList element is a tuple
    in the form:

        tuple(c_func_name(), `signature())

    i.e. the function name followed by its return and
    arguments types.

The function return values are the same of `erl_ddll:load/2`.

Once a library has been loaded, it is possible to use
`erlang:open_port/2` to get a port.  That port could *always* be used
with `ffi:call/3`, `ffi:raw_call/3` or `ffi:raw_call/2`.  However,
if the loaded library does *not* contain a proper `ErlDrvEntry`
structure and a driver init function, the port will **not** be usable
with `erlang:port_command/2`, `erlang:port_control/3` etc.

The following example loads the C standard library and preloads some
functions: ::

    ok = erl_ddll:load_library("/lib", libc,
                               [{preload,
                                 [{puts, {sint, nonnull}},
                                  {putchar, {sint, sint}},
                                  {malloc, {nonnull, size_t}},
                                  {free, {void, nonnull}}]}]).


`erl_ddll:load_library/2`
-------------------------

    erl_ddll:load_library(Path, Name)

Utility function that calls `erl_ddll:load_library/3` with an empty
OptionsList.


`erlang:open_port/1`
--------------------

    erlang:open_port(Library)

Types:

- `Library = string() | atom()`

Open a port towards the specified shared library, possibly loaded with
`erl_ddll:load_library/3`.  Calling this function is equivalent to:

    erlang:open_port({spawn, Library}, [binary])


`erl_ddll:info/2`
-----------------

This EEP proposes a new parameter for the `erl_ddll:info/2` BIF: the
'preloads' atom.  It allows to retrieve information about FFI preloads
for the given library.

The preload information is a list of proplists, one for each preloaded
function.  Each proplist, in turn, has the following format: 

    [ { index,     integer()   },     % Position in the preload list
      { name,      string()    },     % Function name
      { address,   integer()   },     % Function address
      { signature, signature() } ]    % Function signature 
     
This information would be made available also through `erl_ddll:info/0`
and `erl_ddll:info/1`.


`ffi:raw_call/3`
----------------

    ffi:raw_call(Port, CallArgs, Signature) -> term()

Types:

- `Port = port()`

- `CallArgs = tuple(`c_func_name()`, Arg1, ...)`

- `Arg1, ... = term()`

- `Signature = signature()`

Call the specified C function.

This BIF accepts the following parameters:

- **Port**
    
    A port opened towards the required driver/library.

- **CallArgs**
    
    A tuple with the function name (atom or string) followed by
    its arguments (if any).

- **Signature**
  
    Function signature.

This BIF returns the return value of the C function being called (or
'void' if the return type is void).  It automatically converts Erlang
terms to/from C values.  The supported C types and conversions are
reported in the Appendix.

The following example calls the `malloc()` and `free()` functions from the
standard C library (it should work with any Erlang linked-in driver): ::

    Pointer = ffi:raw_call(Port, {malloc, 1024}, {pointer, size_t}),
    ok = ffi:raw_call(Port, {free, Pointer}, {void, pointer}).

**WARNING:** bugs and/or misuses of the external C functions can
affect the Erlang VM, possibly making it crash.  Use this BIF with
extreme care.


`ffi:raw_call/2`
----------------

    ffi:raw_call(Port, OptimizedCall) -> term()

Types:

- `Port = port()`

- `OptimizedCall = {FuncIndex, Arg1, ...}`

- `FuncIndex = func_index()`

- `Arg1, ... = term()`

Call a function preloaded with the 'preload' option of
`erl_ddll:load_library/3`.

This BIF accepts the following parameters:

- **Port**

    A port opened towards the required driver/library (that
    **must** have been loaded with `erl_ddll:load_library/3`).

- **OptimizedCall**
    A tuple with the function index (i.e. its position in
    the preload list) followed by its arguments (if any).

This BIF returns the return value of the C function being called (or
'void' if the return type is void).  It automatically converts Erlang
terms to/from C values.  The supported C types and conversions are
reported in the Appendix.

The following example calls `malloc()` and `free()`, after they have been
preloaded with the code sample shown in `erl_ddll:load_library/3`:

    Port = open_port({spawn, "libc"}, [binary]),
    Pointer = ffi:raw_call(Port, {3, 1024}),
    ffi:raw_call(Port, {4, Pointer})

**WARNING:** bugs and/or misuses of the external C functions can
affect the Erlang VM, possibly making it crash.  Use this BIF with
extreme care.


`ffi:raw_buffer_to_binary/2`
----------------------------

    ffi:raw_buffer_to_binary(Pointer, Size) -> binary()

Types:

- `Pointer = integer()`

- `Size = integer()`

Return a binary with a copy of Size bytes read from the given C
pointer (represented by an integer, possibly returned by a FFI call).

**WARNING:** passing the wrong pointer to this BIF may cause the
Erlang VM to crash.  Use with extreme care.


`ffi:raw_cstring_to_binary/1`
-----------------------------

    ffi:raw_cstring_to_binary(CString) -> binary()

Types:

- `CString = integer()`

Return a binary with a copy of the given NULL-terminated C string (an
integer representing a pointer, possibly returned by a FFI call).  The
binary will include the trailing 0.

**WARNING:** passing a wrong pointer to this BIF may cause the Erlang
VM to crash.  Use with extreme care.


`ffi:call/3`
------------

    call(Port, CFunc, Args) -> RetVal

Types:

- `Port = port()`

- `CFunc = c_func_name() | func_index()
    | tagged_func_name()_ | `tagged_func_index()`

- `Args = [tagged_value()]

- `RetVal = tagged_value()`
    
Call the C function `CFunc` with the given list of arguments, using
the port `Port`.  If the function was preloaded with
`ffi:load_library/3`, all the type tags will be matched against the
preloaded signature before performing the call.

Return the return value of the C function, with the proper type tag.

**Note:** if ``CFunc`` is not of type `tagged_func_name()`, the C
function will be called if and only if it was preloaded with
`erl_ddll:load_library/3` (it is required in order to determine its
return type).

As an example, the following `malloc()` calls are all valid and
equivalent when executed after the code sample shown in
`erl_ddll:load_library/3`:

    %% Use function name, but require preloads for return type
    {nonnull, Ptr1} = ffi:call(Port, "malloc", [{size_t, 1024}]),
    {nonnull, Ptr2} = ffi:call(Port, malloc, [{size_t, 1024}]),

    %% Use function index from preloads list
    {nonnull, Ptr3} = ffi:call(Port, 3, [{size_t, 1024}]),
    {nonnull, Ptr4} = ffi:call(Port, {nonnull, 3}, [{size_t, 1024}]),

    %% These calls do not require any preload information
    {nonnull, Ptr5} = ffi:call(Port, {nonnull, "malloc"}, [{size_t, 1024}]),
    {nonnull, Ptr6} = ffi:call(Port, {nonnull, malloc}, [{size_t, 1024}]),

**WARNING:** bugs and/or misuses of the external C functions can
affect the Erlang VM, possibly making it crash.  Use this BIF with
extreme care.


`ffi:buffer_to_binary/2`
------------------------

    ffi:buffer_to_binary(TaggedNonNull, Size) -> binary()

Types:

- `TaggedNonNull = tuple(nonnull, integer())`

- `Size: integer()`

Return a binary with a copy of `Size` bytes read from the given C
pointer.

**WARNING:** passing a wrong pointer to this function may cause the
Erlang VM to crash.  Use with extreme care.


`ffi:cstring_to_binary/1`
-------------------------

    ffi:cstring_to_binary(TaggedCString) -> binary()

Types:

- `TaggedCString = tuple(cstring, integer())`

Return a binary with a copy of the given NULL-terminated C string.

**WARNING:** passing a wrong pointer to this function may cause the
Erlang VM to crash.  Use with extreme care.


`ffi:sizeof/1`
--------------

    ffi:sizeof(TypeTag) -> integer()

Types:

- `TypeTag: type_tag()`

Return the size (in bytes) of the given FFI type, on the current
platform.


`ffi:check/1`
-------------

    ffi:check(TaggedValue) -> true | false

Types:

- `TaggedValue = tagged_value()`

Returns 'true' if the given type-tagged value is well-formed and
consistent (i.e. it falls in the allowed range for its type, on the
current platform).  Otherwise, returns 'false'.


`ffi:min/1`
-----------

    ffi:min(TypeTag) -> integer()

Types:

- `TypeTag = type_tag()`

Return the minimum value allowed for the given FFI type, on the
current platform.


`ffi:max/1`
-----------

    ffi:max(TypeTag) -> integer()

Types:

- `TypeTag = type_tag()`

Return the maximum value allowed for the given FFI type, on the
current platform.


`ffi_hardcodes.hrl`
-------------------

The `ffi_hardcodes.hrl` file is part of the Erlang ffi library.  It
defines a set of macros for handling FFI types sizes, and for easy
binary matching on C buffers and structures:

-   **`FFI_HARDCODED_<TYPE>`**

    An Erlang bit-syntax snippet (Size/TypeSpecifier) that could
    be used to match the given FFI type inside a binary (possibly
    obtained from a C buffer).  For example, the following binary
    matching:
        
        <<ULong:?FFI_HARDCODED_ULONG, _Rest/binary>> = Binary

    on x86-64 will expand to:

        <<ULong:64/native-unsigned-integer, _Rest/binary>> = Binary

-   **`FFI_HARDCODED_SIZEOF_<TYPE>`**

    The type size in *bytes*

-   **`FFI_HARDCODED_<TYPE>_BITS`**

    The type size in *bits*

As implied by their name, the `ffi_hardcodes.hrl` contents are
*specific to the build platform*, and when they are used, they will be
hard-coded in the resulting ``.beam`` files.  Thus, these macros
should be avoided if a developer expects his/her FFI-based code to be
*portable without recompilation*.  The recommended method for getting
FFI type sizes in a portable way is the `ffi:sizeof/1` function.



Further notes
=============

Notes on FFI preloading
-----------------------

When a library is loaded with `erl_ddll:load_library/3`, it may be
reloaded or unloaded just like any Erlang linked-in driver.  If the
'preload' option is used, then two additional behaviors arise:

-   if `erl_ddll:load_library/3` is called two or more times with the
    same library, then the associated preload list must be rebuilt
    according to the last call.  If no 'preload' option is used, then
    the last preloads (if any) must be kept intact;

-   if an `erl_ddll:reload/2` is issued, then the last preloads must be
    refreshed by performing a new symbol lookup in the loaded library.
    If one or more symbols could not be found anymore, then they must be
    disabled (and an error must raised when trying to use them with
  `ffi:raw_call/2`).


Notes on vararg functions
-------------------------

`ffi:call/3` and `ffi:raw_call/3` may be used to call vararg C
functions, simply by providing the desired number of arguments.

In order to exploit the preloading optimizations, however, it is
necessary to use a different preload for each different function call
signature.  For example, if a developer is going to call ``printf()``
with different arguments, he/she will need to use a preloading list
like the following one:

    ok = erl_ddll:load_library("/lib", libc,
                               [{preload,
                                 [{printf, {sint, cstring}},
                                  {printf, {sint, cstring, double}},
                                  {printf, {sint, cstring, uint, sint}},
                                  {printf, {sint, cstring, cstring}}]}]).


Notes on C pointers and Erlang binaries
---------------------------------------

As reported in the Appendix, an Erlang binary can be passed to a C
function as a 'pointer' value.  In this case, the C function will
receive a pointer to the first byte of binary data.

That pointer will be valid *only* until the C function returns.  If
the C side needs to access the pointer data later, then it should use
the 'binary' FFI type (see next paragraph) or copy the data itself in
a safe place.


Notes on Erlang binaries and reference counting
-----------------------------------------------

As reported in the Appendix, when the 'binary' FFI type is used as
argument, the C function will also receive a binary (in the form of an
``ErlDrvBinary`` pointer).  Correspondingly, a C function with 'binary'
FFI return type must return an ``ErlDrvBinary`` pointer.  Furthermore,
an 'erliovec' argument type will cause the conversion of an Erlang
``iolist()`` into an ``ErlIOVec`` (and its pointer will be passed to
the C function).

There are three rules for properly handling the refcount of binaries
passed to, or returned from, the C side through a FFI call.

1. when a binary is received as argument (either directly, or inside
   an ``ErlIOVec``), and the C side needs to keep a reference, then
   the refcount must be increased;

2. when a binary is created with ``driver_alloc_binary()``, it will
   have the refcount value of 1.  It is considered to be *still*
   referenced by the C side;

3. as a consequence of the previous point, if the C side wants to
   return a newly-crated binary *without* keeping references, it must
   call ``driver_binary_dec_refc()`` before returning.


Notes on type-tagged values
---------------------------

As reported above, the high-level FFI API is based on type-tagged
values.  Type tags, however, may introduce yet another way to
annotate/represent the types of Erlang function parameters --- and it
may become an annoying redundancy, expecially now that type [contracts][12]
are (probably) going to be introduced in Erlang.

Thus, the high-level FFI API should be considered highly experimental
and subject to change, depending on how type contracts will allow to
achieve the same tasks (see [High-level API][]).  This issue will need
to be explored if/when contracts will be available in the standard
Erlang/OTP distribution.



Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This EEP, and the proposed FFI patches (see below), do not introduce
incompatibilities with the standard OTP release.  However, three
(possibly) relevant internal changes are required:

1. the `driver_binary_dec_refc()` function must be allowed to
   reach the refcount of 0 without errors or warnings (even when
   debugging).  This is necessary in order to allow a C function to
   create a binary, drop its references and return it to the Erlang VM
   (see 'Notes on Erlang binaries and reference counting');

2. as a consequence of the previous point,
   `driver_binary_inc_refc()` must be allowed to reach a minimum
   refcount of 1 without errors or warnings (the current minimum value
   is 2);

3. the `iolist()` -> `ErlIOVec` conversion code in `io.c` needs
   to be exposed as a stand-alone function, to be used by the FFI.



Reference implementation
========================

An implementation of this EEP is available on [muvara.org][4]
as a set of patches against OTP R11B-5.

The code is based on the GCC FFI library [(libffi)][5].  libffi is
multi-platform, can be packaged and used separately from the GCC
source code, and is released under a very permissive [license][6]
(compatible with the Erlang Public License).  It has been used to
implement the FFI interface of several applications and languages,
including [Python][7].

The current EEP implementation looks for libffi on the build system,
and links the Erlang emulator against it (preferring the libffi shared
library, when available).  It may be a "good enough" approach, since
libffi is usually pre-packaged and easily available on GNU/Linux, BSD
and Solaris distributions.  However, this approach may create troubles
for developers that compile everything from scratch, could not install
a precompiled libffi package, or just want to force static linking
between the Erlang emulator and libffi.  In order to address these
issues, it is customary that a copy of libffi is distributed together
with the host language, and possibly kept in sync with the upstream
version.  This is what Python actually does, and Erlang/OTP could
possibly adopt the same approach depending on the developers'
feedback.



Appendix
========

Erlang-to-C automatic type conversions
--------------------------------------

The following table reports the Erlang-to-C conversions, used for
passing Erlang terms as C function call arguments.

    ====================== ===============================
     C argument type        Supported Erlang types
    ====================== ===============================
    uchar                  integer()
    schar                  integer()
    ushort                 integer()
    sshort                 integer()
    uint                   integer()
    sint                   integer()
    ulong                  integer()
    slong                  integer()
    uint8                  integer()
    sint8                  integer()
    uint16                 integer()
    sint16                 integer()
    uint32                 integer()
    sint32                 integer()
    uint64                 integer()
    sint64                 integer()
    float                  float()
    double                 float()
    longdouble             float()
    pointer                binary() | integer()
    cstring                binary() | integer()
    nonnull                binary() | integer()
    size_t                 integer()
    ssize_t                integer()
    pid_t                  integer()
    off_t                  integer()
    binary                 binary()
    erliovec               iolist()
    ====================== ===============================


C-to-Erlang automatic type conversions
--------------------------------------

The following table reports the C-to-Erlang conversions, used for
converting C function return values into Erlang terms.

    ====================== ===============================
     C return type          Resulting Erlang type
    ====================== ===============================
    uchar                  integer()
    schar                  integer()
    ushort                 integer()
    sshort                 integer()
    uint                   integer()
    sint                   integer()
    ulong                  integer()
    slong                  integer()
    uint8                  integer()
    sint8                  integer()
    uint16                 integer()
    sint16                 integer()
    uint32                 integer()
    sint32                 integer()
    uint64                 integer()
    sint64                 integer()
    float                  float()
    double                 float()
    longdouble             float()
    pointer                integer()
    cstring                integer()
    nonnull                integer()
    size_t                 integer()
    ssize_t                integer()
    off_t                  integer()
    pid_t                  integer()
    binary                 binary()
    ====================== ===============================



[1]: http://www1.erlang.org/documentation/doc-4.8.2/lib/ig-1.8/doc/index.html
    "IG: the Erlang Interface Generator, Törnquist and Lundell" 

[2]: http://www.erlang.se/workshop/2002/Fritchie.pdf
    "The Evolution of Erlang Drivers and the Erlang Driver Toolkit, Fritchie"

[3]: http://dryverl.objectweb.org/
    "The Dryverl Erlang/C binding compiler"

[4]: http://muvara.org/crs4/erlang/ffi
    "Foreign Function Interface (FFI) for Erlang/OTP"

[5]: http://gcc.gnu.org/viewcvs/trunk/libffi/
    "libffi: the GCC Foreign Function Interface Library"

[6]: http://gcc.gnu.org/viewcvs/checkout/trunk/libffi/LICENSE
    "The libffi license"

[7]: http://python.net/crew/theller/ctypes/
    "The CPython package"

[8]: http://www.cse.unsw.edu.au/~chak/haskell/ffi/
    "The Haskell 98 Foreign Function Interface"

[9]: http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.5.0/docs/guide/jni/
    "The Java Native Interface"

[10]: http://docs.python.org/ext/ext.html
    "Extending and Embedding the Python Interpreter"

[11]: http://docs.python.org/api/api.html
    "Python/C API Reference Manual"

[12]: http://user.it.uu.se/~kostis/Papers/contracts.pdf
    "A Language for Specifying Type Contracts in Erlang and its Interaction with Success Typings, Jiménez Lindahl and Sagonas (Presented at the 2007 SIGPLAN Erlang Workshop)."



Copyright
=========

Copyright (C) 2007 by CRS4 (Center for Advanced Studies, Research and
Development in Sardinia) - <http://www.crs4.it/>

Author: Alceste Scalas <alceste (at) crs4 (dot) it>

This EEP is released under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 License. See <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/>



[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
