    Author: Richard A. O'Keefe <ok(at)cs(dot)otago(dot)ac(dot)nz>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Created: 10-Jul-2008
    Erlang-Version: R12B-4
    Post-History:
****
EEP 12: Extensions to comprehensions
----



Abstract
========

Add tuple-valued comprehensions to go with list and binary
comprehensions.

Add tuple generators to go with list and binary generators.

Fix a syntax botch in comprehension qualifiers by explicitly
recognising pattern = value bindings and treating them in a
way that makes sense.

Specification
=============

Currently, Erlang has

        '['  Expr '||' Generators-And-Tests ']'
        '<<' Expr '||' Generators-And-Tests '>>'

for generating lists and binaries, but there is no corresponding
form for generating tuples.  We add

        '{' Expr '||' Generators-And-Tests '}'

with the meaning that `{ E || G }` has the same behaviour as
`erlang:list_to_tuple([E || G])` except that it need not call
`erlang:list_to_tuple/1`.

Currently, Erlang comprehensions allow

        Pattern '<-' Expr

to enumerate over list and

        Pattern '<=' Expr

to enumerate over binaries.  The second of these forms is,
I must say, not just asking for trouble, but screaming for it.
This proposal adds three new forms:

        Pattern '['  '<-' ']'  Expr
        Pattern '{'  '<-' '}'  Expr
        Pattern '<<' '<-' '>>' Expr

for enumerating over lists, tuples, and binaries respectively,
providing an iconic representation of what Expr should be.
`[<-]` and `<< <- >>` have exactly the same semantics as the
existing `<-` and `<=` do.  The semantics of Pattern `{<=}` Expr
is that of `Pattern <- erlang:tuple_to_list(Expr)`, except that
`erlang:tuple_to_list/1` need not be called.

Currently the Generators-And-Tests part allows a sequence of
generators and tests, where a test is any expression.  A test
must evaluate to either 'false' or 'true'.  The form `Pattern = Expr`
is syntactically an expression, so is allowed as a test.
However, in context, this makes no sense.  For a given Expr,
there are four possible outcomes:
1. Expr raises an exception => an exception is raised.
2. Expr does not yield false or true => an exception is raised.
3. Expr yields false => the test fails;
   this might as well have been Expr without Pattern.
4. Expr yields true => the test succeeds;
   this might as well have been Expr without Pattern,
   and Pattern = true beforehand.
======================================================================
This proposal changes part of the description of comprehensions to
each Qualifier is either a generator, a binder, or a filter.

A generator is a list generator, a tuple generator,
or a bit string generator.
    
A list generator is written as
        Pattern <- List_Expr
or as
        Pattern [<-] List_Expr
where List_Expr is an expression which must evaluate to
a list of terms.

A tuple generator is written as
        Pattern {<-} Tuple_Expr
where Tuple_Expr is an expression which must evaluate to
a tuple of terms.

A bit string generator is written as
        Bit_String_Pattern <= Bit_String_Expr
or as
        Bit_String_Pattern << <- >> Bit_String_Expr
where Bit_String_Expr is an expression which must
evaluate to a bit string.

The variables in the generator patterns shadow variables in the
function clause surrounding the comprehension.  These variables
are not visible outside the comprehension.

A binder has the form
    Pattern = Expr
or
    Pattern = Binder
This evaluates the Expr and matches the result against the
Pattern, binding variables in it.
The variables in the binder patterns shadow variables in the
function clause surrounding the comprehension.  These variables
are not visible outside the comprehension.

A filter is an expression which evaluates to 'true' or 'false'.
They are not limited to being guard tests.


Motivation
==========

Using Clean as well as Erlang, the lack of tuple comprehensions
and tuple generators is an irritation.  It is possible to get the
desired effect in the existing language, but especially since
bit string comprehensions were added to the language, the
omission seems utterly pointless.  The new forms are easier to
think of and easier to read than forms that go through list
comprehensions.

Haskell list comprehensions allow generators, filters, and
'let' bindings.  The lack of let bindings in Erlang list
comprehensions is difficult to understand; the fact that what
LOOKS like Erlang's equivalent of let bindings is allowed but
misbehaves at run time is difficult to forgive.


Rationale
=========

The syntax for tuple comprehensions is obvious; no other syntax
would be tolerable.

The syntax for tuple generators has a certain gawky charm;
perhaps only a mother could love it.  I tried <-[] <-{} <-<<>>
but had trouble getting Yecc to like those.  If it can be
squeezed past Yecc's limited lookahead somehow, the forms with
the arrow outside the brackets would be prettier.  Contrast
    { X+1 || X {<-} Xs }
    { X+1 || X <-{} Xs }

The way Erlang currently allows Pattern = Expr in comprehension
qualifiers but gives it a completely useless meaning is a syntax
bug that needs urgent correction.  One approach is to recognise
attempts to use the form and report them as syntax errors; to me
it seems better to implement it so that it works as expected.

All three of these extensions can be implemented by mapping to
the current language:

    { E || GT }  => erlang:list_to_tuple([E || GT])
    P {<-} E     => P <- erlang:tuple_to_list(E)
    P = E        => P <- [E]

and the reference implementation does exactly that.  However,
better implementations are possible, as for that matter are
better implementations of list comprehension, and in the mean
time at least the code will be no less efficient than what the
programmer could have written and the source will be more
intention-revealing.



Backwards Compatibility
=======================

The new comprehension and generator forms are currently syntax
errors, so no existing code can be affected by them.

The new binder form (or rather, the newly correct recognition
of binder forms) is currently allowed by the Erlang compiler.
However, as explained above, it cannot possibly be USEFUL with
its current reading.  It is conceivable that there might be
test programs designed to elicit the bug which will stop working
once the syntax bug is fixed, but it is not likely that any real
code will be affected.




Reference Implementation
========================

The auxiliary file [`eep-0012-1.diff`][1] is a patch file to be
applied to `erl_parse.yrl`. The patched file has been checked by `yecc`,
which is happy with it. However, that's all the testing that has been done.

This implementation does the three source to source rewrites
described in the previous section, entirely in the parser.
The rest of the Erlang system needs no changes whatever.



[EEP-12]: <eep-00012.md> "EEP 12 Source"

[1]: eep-0012-1.diff
     "Patch file to be applied to erl_parse.yrl"



Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
