    Author: Richard A. O'Keefe <ok(at)cs(dot)otago(dot)ac(dot)nz>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Erlang-Version: R12B-4
    Created: 08-Aug-2008
    Post-History:
****
EEP 21: Optional trailing commas for lists and tuples
----



Abstract
========

Allow an extra comma at the end of a list or tuple.
Darren New proposed this change; Richard O'Keefe, who doesn't
like it very much, wrote it up as an EEP.



Specification
=============

A list that would have ended with ",X]" for some term X
may instead end with ",X,]".
A tuple that would have ended with ",X}" for some term X
may instead end with ",X,}".
The rule for tuples also applies to records and -record
declarations.



Motivation
==========

About 5,000 lines of the Erlang/OTP sources begin with a right
square bracket or right curly brace.  For example, -record
declarations are commonly laid out as

    -record(foo, {
        field_1 = default_1,
        ...
        field_n = default_n
     }).

e.g.,

    -record(hostent, {
    	 h_name,
    	 h_aliases = [],
    	 h_addrtype,
    	 h_length,
    	 h_addr_list = []
    	}).

and record creation expressions are often laid out similarly, e.g.,

    make_hostent(Name, Addrs, Aliases, ?S_A) ->
        #hostent {
        	  h_name      = Name,
        	  h_addrtype  = inet,
        	  h_length    = 4,
        	  h_addr_list = Addrs,
        	  h_aliases   = Aliases
        	 };

Adding entries to such lists (in the informal sense of "list"),
removing entries, and reordering entries would be simpler if they
were all punctuated the same way.  Lists (in the Erlang sense of
"list") of options are also often laid out like this.

C, C++, Java, and Javascript allow a trailing comma in
initial value lists.  Python allows trailing commas in lists and
dictionaries.  Python in particular is evidence that a programming
language can support this feature without charges of "C envy" or
of extreme ugliness.



Rationale
=========

I don't actually feel any need for this proposal; I believe that
the answer is better tool support.  However, many people are
wedded to their tools, even more than their programming languages.
Darren New is not the only one to have asked for it, and with
about 1 SLOC in 110 of the Erlang/OTP sources reflecting a list or
tuple where this feature could have been used, it's very much a
low cost high public appreciation feature.

I wrote that last sentence before working on the parser to make it
accept this "feature".  There are 115 lines of plain diffs.  I
could have made this change to the Prolog parser in 10 minutes,
but then the Prolog parser has the enormous advantage of NOT being
written using an LR parser generator like Yecc.  Still, now that I
*have* hacked on the parser, the cost to everyone *else* is low.

The specification was carefully worded.  Commas are NOT allowed in
empty lists or tuples, nor in list or tuple comprehensions.  They
are only allowed after a final element, so `[1|L,]` is also not
allowed.  Nor are trailing commas allowed inside argument lists,
only in `[]` and `{}`.  They are, however, allowed in tuple and
record types.

This is very similar to the "optional semicolons" EEP (which was
FAR simpler to implement).  The heart and soul of that EEP is the
desire to make semicolons and commas look DIFFERENT; for this
reason it is important NOT to allow optional trailing semicolons.
If semicolons may trail, commas must not.
If commas may trail, semicolons must not.
It is also important NOT to approach the "consistent punctuation
for list elements" problem by allowing optional leading commas.
If semicolons may lead, commas must not.
If commas may lead, semicolons must not.
Since trailing commas are established practice in C, C++, Java,
ECMAScript, Python, &c, commas trail, semicolons lead.

I repeat that this is not my idea.  I've just written up the EEP
and figured out how to implement it.  With nearly 1% of the SLOC
in the Erlang/OTP system being cases where people might well have
had reason to add a trailing comma, had it been legal, it seemed
worth while finding out whether it would be practical.



Backwards Compatibility
=======================

All existing Erlang code remains acceptable with unchanged
semantics.  The commas are dealt with entirely in the parser;
other language manipulation tools never know that they were
there, so work perfectly with code using them.



Reference Implementation
========================

The auxiliary file [eep-0021-1.diff][]
is a patch file to be applied to `erl_parse.yrl`.

You would think that all we'd need to do would be to change

    ... ']'                    ... '}'

to	

    ... ',' ']'                ... ',' '}'

in several places.  You would be wrong.  With a different grammar,
maybe.  With the current grammar, this was an uncommonly tricky
change requiring surgery in all sorts of places.  The result gets
through Yecc with no complaints other than the two shift/reduce
complaints that are expected (and have nothing to do with this change).



[eep-0021-1.diff]: eep-0021-1.diff
    "Patch for erl_parse.yrl"



Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
